This paper provides an innovative segmentation approach stemming from the combination of cluster analyses and fuzzy learning techniques.
Our research provides a real case solution in the Spanish energy market to respond to the increasing number of requests from industry managers to be able to interpret ambiguous market information as realistically as possible.
The learning stage is based on the segments created from a non-hierarchical cluster analysis.
This results in fuzzy segmentation which permits patterns to be assigned to more than one segment.
This in turn reveals that “fuzzifying” an excluding attitudinal segmentation offers more interpretable and acceptable results for managers.
Our results demonstrate that 30% of the individuals show plural patterns of behaviour because they have a significant degree of adequacy to more than one segment.
In such a rational market, this fact enables sales forces to develop more precise approaches to capture new customers and/or retain existing ones.
Market segmentation is a core marketing concept that is conceptually simple to define and understand but inherently difficult to apply (Yankelovich & Meer, 2006; Liu, Kiang, & Brusco, 2012).
Both the managers and researchers in the field are focused on the usage and development of the segmentation approaches and segmentation techniques (Hiziroglu, 2013) that help them to better understand their market, not only to attract new customers but also to keep and satisfy the existing ones.
Following Smith’s definition of the market segmentation concept (Smith, 1956), that recognised the existence of heterogeneity in the demand for goods and services, market segmentation has become a core concept in marketing theory and practice.
Market segmentation does not have a unique accepted definition.
Despite the fact that the essence of grouping individuals is unquestionable, the concept of market segmentation itself has been understood in different ways.
Frank, Massey, and Wind (1972) and Assael and Roscoe (1976) were followers of Smith’s conceptualization of market segmentation.
Another manner to perceive market segmentation is to identify homogeneous subgroups in a heterogeneous market (Johnson, 1971; Kotler, 2000).
Moreover, there is a line of research focused on identifying and measuring a list of criteria that must be fulfilled for effective segmentation (Baker, 1988; Loudon & Della Bitta, 1993; Wedel & Kamakura, 2002).
Independently of its meaning, it is important to note that segments are not physical entities that naturally co-exist in the marketplace; they are defined by researchers and practitioners to improve their ability to capture and serve their customers as best as possible (Kotler, 1989).
A double connotation of the concept of segmentation is found in the literature: segmentation as a strategy and segmentation as a technique (Luque, 2000).
From the technique point of view, although classifying customers into groups might seem quite simple, two crucial considerations arise when building a segmentation approach.
Firstly, the selection of the variables.
In the marketing literature, several segmentation variables can be found such as geographic, demographic, firmographic, behavioural, situational, attitudinal, and product specific variables (Hiziroglu, 2013).
In fact, the choice of these criteria may lead to differing segments.
The same often occurs when choosing the segmentation technique.
Boosted by the increasingly vast availability of consumer demographic, attitudinal, and behavioural data, recent research indicates a tendency towards the use of sophisticated techniques in different types of marketing problems, particularly in segmentation (Liao, 2005), although this tendency is still at an early stage (Hiziroglu, 2013).
Following Flach’s (2001) declaration that when analysing the state of the art in machine learning there is a clear trend in research that combines approaches that were previously considered separate, this paper aims to extend the literature with an applied segmentation marketing model based on the combination of two classification techniques: a statistical cluster analysis and an AI fuzzy learning technique.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in a market segmentation context that fuzzifies crisp clusters to obtain a better and more realistic understanding of the market.
This study contributes to the existing literature in several ways.
Firstly, combining a clustering technique (that is well-known, reliable, and commonly accepted by practitioners) with a flexible and adaptable artificial intelligence tool, may generate interesting input for both academics and practitioners.
From an academic point of view, this paper brings the classical debate about statistics versus artificial intelligence closer.
From the practitioner’s perspective, an improvement in the decision-making process is offered as managers can obtain more reliable and more realistic results.
Secondly, a solution is offered for the increasing number of manager requests made in the Spanish energy industry for an approach enabling the interpretation of ambiguous market information as realistically as possible by fuzzifying an excluding attitudinal segmentation.
Thirdly, there is the promising possibility of implementing the proposed approach in other real business cases when non-overlapping segmentation occurs.
The paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 focuses on the methodology of fuzzification.
Section 3 applies the proposed methodology to a real-word case where a leading company from the energetic sector segments the micro-small and medium-sized companies in Spain.
Research findings and managerial implications are presented in Section 4.
Finally, the conclusions and directions for further research are explained in Section 5.
The methodology presented in this paper corresponds to the extension of an automatic learning technique that permits to expand a crisp segmentation to a fuzzy one, allowing patterns to be assigned to more than one segment.
The fuzzy learning stage will be conducted from the results of a non-hierarchical cluster analysis.
A fuzzy membership function is defined for each segment associating with each pattern a vector of membership or adequacy degrees (note that the membership degree from fuzzy sets theory is noted in this paper as the adequacy degree because it is more suitable to a marketing context).
Moreover, the concept of the compatibility between a crisp and a fuzzy classification is defined to analyse the fitness between them.
Fuzzy connectives Based on the multi-valued logic introduced by Lukasiewicz (Bergmann, 2008), the fuzzy set theory was introduced by Zadeh (1965).
The main idea is to consider a fuzzy set as a group without a sharp boundary (Dubois & Prade, 2004), thus changing the membership function concept defined in classic sets theory as a binary assessment to a gradual function valued in the interval [0.1].
Zadeh's approach to fuzzy decision analysis includes the concepts of the fuzzy restrictions and fuzzy truth values that can be viewed as elastic constraints on the values that may be assigned to a variable.
In the fuzzy sets literature, t-norms, which are a generalisation of (classical) set intersection, and t-conorms, which are a generalisation of (classical) set union, are considered the basic operators to aggregate the partial information given by two fuzzy values (Dubois & Prade, 2004).
T-norms and t-conorms are the only associative aggregation functions.
These associative aggregation functions lead to n-ary aggregation functions by means of the direct iteration in n arguments.
Among these fuzzy connectives the Frank’s family is the most broadly used because they can be generated in a parametric way, as defined in (1).
(1) where n is the number of values to be aggregated and s is the Frank’s parameter.
Note that considering the values of , the t-norms, the Min, Product and Lukasiewicz are obtained, respectively: • MinMax: – Min: – Max: • Probabilistic Product: – – • Lukasiewicz: – – Considering for each t-norm T its dual t-conorm defined as , in this paper the linearly compensated hybrid connectives are used to aggregate the fuzzy values: (2) where is known as the level of tolerance of the classification.
It can be noted that for the t-norm is obtained, i.e., the least degree of tolerance is considered, and for the t-conorm is the result, i.e., the most degree of tolerance considered.
Supervised learning technique In machine learning and data mining fields, supervised learning is generally used for reproducing the correspondence between the input patterns and the desired outputs.
These outputs are normally defined by a human expert or by observing a real phenomenon.
However, in this work, the supervised learning is viewed as learning from an accepted multivariate clustering technique.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in which the learning stage is conducted to learn from the non-hierarchical cluster analysis results.
In this work, the supervised learning technique is based on the LAMDA algorithm (Aguado, 1998; Aguado, Catalá, & Parra, 1999; Aguilar & López de Mántaras, 1982), a learning technique based on fuzzy hybrid connectives, as defined in (2), that employs the interpolation capabilities of the logic operators over the fuzzy environments (Klir & Yuan, 1995).
LAMDA learns the optimal values for tolerance and Frank’s parameter (1) that permit us to obtain the segmentation that best matches with the statistical segmentation accepted a priori.
In addition, the LAMDA demonstrates the overlapping between segments.
Therefore, the promising solution for practitioners of associating to each pattern or individual a vector with its membership degrees to each cluster is solved, as exemplified in Table 1.
Table 1.
Example of fuzzy classification, where each individual belongs to each cluster with a certain membership degree.
Individual Cluster 1 Cluster 2 … Cluster k 1 0.85 0.23 … 0.77 2 0.45 0.78 … 0.67 … … … … … N 0.12 0.84 … 0.23 For instance, in a crisp segmentation, individual #1 would be assigned to the cluster 1 while in the fuzzy segmentation obtained by the LAMDA algorithm, its high membership degree to cluster k could also be considered.
Compatibility analysis Once a normalization process of the membership degrees is conducted and to measure the matching between the initial crisp segmentation and the fuzzy segmentation obtained by the LAMDA, an analysis of compatibility is carried out.
To this end, instead of measuring the coincidences between both the fuzzy and the crisp segmentation, a more flexible formulae is considered.
Therefore, each pattern is assigned not only to its maximum membership segment, but also to every segment for which its membership degree is high.
We assume a membership degree to be high when it surpasses the % of its maximum membership degree, where is usually considered to be greater than or equal to .
Table 2 displays the fuzzy contingency table considering a fuzzy segmentation { , …, , …, } and its crisp version {, …, , …, }, while is the number of individuals initially assigned to segment j in the crisp segmentation that have a high membership degree to fuzzy segment i.
Table 2.
Fuzzy contingency table.
Fuzzy segments Crisp segmentation Fuzzy marginals … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … Note that and , where N is the number of individuals, because several individuals are counted more than once.
However, the fuzzy marginals state how many individuals exhibit a high membership degree to each fuzzy segment.
Then, the index of fuzzy compatibility () between the crisp segmentation and its fuzzified one is defined as: (3) When for all individuals their location in the crisp segmentation coincides with the segment in which the individual has the maximum membership degree, the fuzzy compatibility index between the two segmentations is 1.
In addition, we can measure to what extent the information given by the fuzzy segmentation improves the crisp segmentation.
In this sense, an index of extension ( ) reflecting the additional information provided by the fuzzification is defined (4).
(4) where is the number of individuals belonging to i segments in the fuzzy segmentation.
The senior management in a leading energy company in Spain assumed that boosting sales and winning new customers did not necessarily entail expanding the sales network.
Instead, it decided to interpret the market from a new perspective and thus enhance business performance.
To date, the company’s segmentation approach was largely based on both customer demographics such as the type of business (store, bar, restaurant, office, hairdresser), the size of the business (determined by the number of employees), the country area (Catalonia, East/South, Center, North/West) and the product characteristics (energy, eco-energy etc.).
This segmentation proved useless to the sales force.
For instance, the salesmen complained bitterly that not all restaurant owners in the northern region were equally willing to buy the firm’s top-of-the-range product.
The customers’ response to an end-of-year 10% special discount was equally unreliable.
Thus, differentiating the firm’s offerings through new features and functions was not sufficient to cater to clients’ ever more heterogeneous requirements and the need on the part of the firm to win new customers.
Furthermore, the salesmen had told the managers that the SMEs (small and medium enterprises) changed their minds and behaviour depending on the moment and other factors.
This greatly reduced the salesmen’s scope for maneuver.
Hence senior management’s interest in building a new model of customer segmentation that not only met the needs and preferences of each segment but that also could accurately depict the chameleon-like behaviour of clients (Casabayó & Martín, 2010) was one of their main goals.
Data set The study universe consisted of individuals aged between 25 and 65 who took decisions in their respective SMEs in Spain but that who had yet to contract any energy services from the company.
Table 3 describes the sample, which was weighted by the type of company, defined by their activity, size and area based on the 2009 National Classification of Economic Activities (NACE) data from the Spanish Statistics Institute (INE).
Table 3.
Description of the sample.
Business type Store 270 Office 177 Bar 117 Restaurant 73 Hairdresser 48 Other services 117 802 Zone East/south 253 Centre 200 Catalonia 198 North-west 151 802 Num.
of employees Zero employees 379 From 1 to 5 305 From 6 to 49 118 802 The basic information for the analysis was obtained through personal interviews using a structured questionnaire (Table 4 exemplifies some of the questions included in the questionnaire) with visual support of approximately 45 min, applied to a total sample of 802 individuals from the study universe.
The absolute margin of error for this sample size was +3.53%.
Once the data had been gathered, the 30 binary variables concerning attitude were selected and two segmentation techniques were used for the analysis.
Table 4.
Extracted from the 30 binary attitudinal variables.
Question Choice A Choice B 6 “I like to stand out above the others, be distinctive, different” “I hate to be the focus of attention on things” 17 “In my company I like to take some risks to evolve” “In my company I’d rather not take many risks” 26 “All energy suppliers are basically the same” “There are important differences between the different suppliers” 31 “The energy supplier offers negotiating capacity in the conditions” “The bargaining is absolutely nil” 3.2.
Results from the non-hierarchical clustering The first segmentation technique used the multivariate statistical method known as non-hierarchical cluster analysis, with free centres of gravity.
Based on the non-hierarchical cluster analysis, the 5 segments covering attitudes towards the energy market were identified.
Fig 1 reflects the distribution of these segments and a detailed description can be found in Appendix A.
Distribution of the considered initial segments Fig 1.
Distribution of the considered initial segments.
Statistical techniques are powerful data analysis tools, but they limit an individual to one population segment.
However, is this “steady state” picture true to life?
From a practical point of view, the same individual may well have two or more attitudes to the energy market.
For instance, might an ‘Optimistic, Receptive’ individual sometimes think like a ‘Safety, Service’ one?
It is not only possible but also highly likely that certain respondents’ views and behaviours will span two segments.
With the use of fuzzy segmentation, it is possible to determine whether the individuals in our segment have clear-cut attitudes or whether there are blurred cases.
Fuzzification of the attitudinal segments By the application of the second classification technique introduced in subSection 2.2, fuzziness was added to create a more powerful segmentation scheme.
First, each individual was placed in the cluster in which it fitted best.
The second stage consisted of examining individuals with a value of over 90% of that maximum “fit” (or “adequacy”) degree when placed in another segment.
In such cases, these individuals were considered to belong to both segments.
Table 5 displays the Fuzzy contingency table analysing the fuzzy compatibility between the chosen fuzzy segmentation and the initial segmentation.
Table 5.
Fuzzy contingency table of the case.
In bold, cases in which fuzzy segmentation coincides with crisp segmentation.
Fuzzy segments Crisp segmentation Fuzzy marginals Uninvolved, Impassive Active, Demanding Indignant, Show-of Optimistic, Receptive Safety, Service Uninvolved, Impassive 283 2 0 5 0 290 Active, Demanding 18 183 10 55 6 272 Indignant, Show-of 30 31 114 17 1 193 Optimistic, Receptive 7 34 2 133 1 177 Safety, Service 39 24 2 6 67 138 Note that, on the one hand, it is not logical to compute crisp marginals because certain individuals would be counted more than once.
On the other hand, the fuzzy marginals indicate the information concerning the number of individuals that have a high membership degree to each fuzzy segment.
Based on Table 5, the Index of Compatibility is computed as defined in (3).
Table 6 displays the adequacy degree of each SME to each of the existing segments.
This table exemplifies 20 of the 802 individuals in the sample and their“fit” in each segment.
For example, individual #14 is interesting.
Although her maximum adequacy degree at 0.818 places her in the ‘Uninvolved, Impassive’ segment, it also fits well in the ‘Safety, Service’ segment, with a value of over 90% of its maximum.
These values are too high to justify restricting the individual to the ‘Uninvolved, Impassive’ segment.
Let us consider another example, individual #19.
It clearly exhibits just one pattern, the ‘Uninvolved, Impassive’ segment because the adequacy degrees of this individual to the other existing segments never exceeds 50% of its maximum value.
Table 6.
Extract of the adequacy degrees (or ‘fit’) of each individual in each segment.
In black, the maximum adequacy; in dark grey, the values greater than 0.9∗ maximum adequacy; in light gray, the values greater than 0.5∗ maximum adequacy; in white, otherwise.
As exhibited in Table 7, out of the 802 SMEs in our study, 558 (70%) belong to just one segment.
Therefore, they therefore follow a single behavioural pattern.
The corollary is that according to the index of the extension defined (4), that is to say, more than 30% of the individuals, apart from belonging to their respective own segment, belong to an additional one to a high degree of adequacy.
Table 7.
Plurality of the patterns per individual.
Companies Frequency With 1 pattern 558 With 2 patterns 220 With 3 patterns 24 With 4 patterns 0 With 5 patterns 0
When segmenting individuals it is usually necessary to place them in a single segment or category.
Therefore, being able to carry out a fuzzy segmentation that does not force every individual in the sample to belong to one segment is a great help for marketing experts because it gives them a clearer vision of reality and helps fine-tune their efforts to win new customers, boost re-orders, and avoid churn.
Fuzzy segmentation may be crucial in a market segmentation strategy (Choffray & Lilien, 1978; Yankelovich & Meer, 2006).
In a rational market such as the energy market, the fact that 30% of individuals show multiple patterns of behaviour helps the sales force create better approaches to selling.
Extreme cases are easy to recognise, but for ambiguous cases, identifying ‘the second-best’ approach is a competitive advantage.
Therefore, sales people are trained to identify individuals from each segment.
Table 8 reveals that 25 SMEs in the ‘Uninvolved, Impassive’ segment exhibit a high adequacy degree to the ‘Safety, Service’ segment, 15 to the ‘Indignant, Show-off’ segment, 6 to the ‘Active, Demanding’ segment, and 4 present ‘Optimistic, Receptive’ patterns.
Moreover, for each of the segments presented, 33 SMEs from the ‘Active, Demanding’ segment also demonstrate the ‘Optimistic, Receptive’ pattern, and 54 of the ‘Optimistic, Receptive’ segment also behave as ‘Active, Demanding’ and so on.
Table 8.
Identification of the pattern plurality.
In bold, number of SMEs with maximum adequacy to each class.
The rest of cells contains the SMEs with pattern plurality, highlighting in grey, for each row, the class with more SMEs.
Sales managers were persuaded to try the ‘second-best’ argument when the best argument failed.
For example, the salesforce will approach ‘uninvolved and impassive’ customers with offers of savings and cost cutting plans.
However, if this fails, a list of guarantees and solutions would be proposed as well.
Therefore, the new segmentation approach provides an improvement in the decision-making process because managers can obtain more reliable and realistic data, and because they can turn this data into competitive, applicable, and tracked decisions.
Using a clustering technique that is well-known, reliable, and commonly accepted by practitioners, and combining it with a flexible and adaptable artificial intelligence tool has interesting managerial implications: • Managerial skepticism is reduced: one of the greatest limitations faced in the AI field, and specifically in terms of learning techniques, is managing the ‘black box’.
While statistical methods are easy to track, the same cannot be said regarding automatic learning techniques, which are incapable of showing all the steps the algorithm takes before presenting its final results.
This limitation provokes scepticism among marketing professionals.
The process of fuzzifying the segmentation produced in cluster analysis reduces the perception of unreliability in the results, and managers can track an important part of the validation process.
• Data realism is increased: one of the major disadvantages faced in statistical segmentation (which is currently preferred by marketing departments) is obtaining exclusive segments on which managers can make decisions.
Practitioners agree that individuals may act differently depending on the moment; but this diversity cannot be captured with non-hierarchical clustering.
Fuzzifying is the process of converting an exclusive segmentation into a non-exclusive segmentation.
Each individual may belong to only one segment with clustering.
In practice, this limitation of a single segment for each individual is overcome, and the result is a more realistic interpretation of the data and better decisions.
• The application of the two techniques does not complicate the process of decision making.
Based on the same and accepted segmentation, a learning algorithm is formulated to fuzzify the segments.
Despite the fact that one of the existing lines of research is concerned with comparing the effectiveness of the techniques and demonstrating whether the learning techniques are more accurate than the traditional statistical methods, particularly as regards market segmentation (Balakrishnan, Cooper, Jacob, & Lewis, 1996; Dasgupta, Dispensa, & Ghose, 1994; Davies, Moutinho, & Curry, 1996; Mazanec, 1992; Setiono, Thong, & Yap, 1998) and targeting (Fish, Barnes, & AikenAssistant, 1995; Huang & Lippman, 1987; Tam, 1994; Yoon, Swales Jr, & Margavio, 1993), the contribution of this paper is to provide a segmentation methodology that demonstrates the complementarity between a statistical technique and AI technique.
Compared to other disciplines, it is difficult to observe a growing number of soft computing technology applications to marketing problems, particularly for customers segmentation.
According to Hiziroglu (2013), there are four main reasons.
First, there is a political reason.
Second, there are data, technical and methodological requirements.
Third, there is the “complexity of the technology” and, finally, “the existing gap between applied science researchers and social scientists”.
The real case of motivational segmentation presented in this article offers the marketing experts a non-exclusive segmentation approach that meets the commercial need to understand and interpret ambiguous market information as realistically as possible.
With our paper, we not only remove the barriers between the applied science researchers and the social scientists but also demonstrate that reducing the perceived complexity of the technology is possible when combining the most popular statistical clustering technique with a fuzzy learning technique.
In fact, a new line of research may be opened when exporting this methodology to other markets, as long as a non-overlapping segmentation is given by the imprecise input variables.
Moreover, exporting this methodology to other countries could be interesting, in order to internationally compare patterns of behaviour.
Moreover, the same approach can be applied to fuzzify all the individuals of the population instead of the individuals of the sample.
While we strongly believe that this research fills a large gap in the literature, there are certain directions that remain for future research.
That said, one of the greatest challenges faced in the AI field and, in terms of the learning techniques is managing its inherent “black box”.
While statistical methods are easy to track, the same cannot be said of the automatic learning techniques.
The existing learning techniques are inadequate for demonstrating the steps of the algorithm before its final results are presented.
This limitation still provokes skepticism, especially amongst the marketing professionals in Spain.
Appendix A.
Description of the Attitudinal Segments A.1.
Uninvolved, Impassive “I am the company founder and am proud of what I have achieved.
My business is the right size, and I do not want it to grow or to take risks”.
“Energy costs are not important, they are just another facet of our business and will not change the way I work.
As far as suppliers are concerned, your firm is just one of the pack.
Suppliers are hopeless in regard to discounts and have no power to negotiate”.
“I prefer a straightforward installation and standard, basic service, and I am not interested in energy efficiency or maintenance.
I do not need direct, special contact with the firm”.
A.2.
Active, Demanding “I lead a busy life.
I have to look out for myself because life is tough.
I like to stand out from the crowd and be different.
I am optimistic about the future, am daring and like to be the first to try out new products and services.
I also like taking risks so I can move with the times.
Change holds great opportunities for growth and is the key to my business”.
“Energy is one more piece of business infrastructure, and I do not mind paying more for a service that meets my needs.
I like to be told about new products and services.
I think suppliers have improved their offers, products and services and that they now have greater power to negotiate deals”.
“My business requires energy efficiency and a maintenance service, and contact with the supplier must be direct and special”.
A.3.
Indignant, Show-of “I like to stand out from the crowd.
Life is tough and you have to look out for yourself.
I am not particularly optimistic about the future, and the slump has hit me hard”.
“Energy is one of the biggest costs for my business, and I prefer standard service that is as cheap as possible.
I believe contact with the supplier should be direct and special”.
“I am very unhappy with the service.
Suppliers go in for hard-selling, and their salesmen are poorly-trained and only interested in billing.
They offer the same old products and service.
They see you as just another sap.
They have no negotiating power.
We need an energy-efficient service to save money”.
A.4.
Optimistic, Receptive “I inherited the business.
Although the recession has hit us hard, I am optimistic about the future.
Change is a growth opportunity, and that is why our business strategy is to grow over the next few years.
I like taking certain risks to develop the business”.
“Energy is one of our biggest costs given the nature of the business, and I believe energy trends will affect the way we work.
I prefer a cheap, standard service”.
“I am pleased with our energy suppliers.
They offer attractive discounts, have the power to negotiate and seek tailor-made solutions for one?s business.
They provide a special, customized service”.
A.5.
Safety, Service “I founded the company.
I am conservative in regard to running the firm, and I prefer not to take risks.
Luckily, business has held up, and the strategy is to hang on without seeking growth.
I dislike being the center of attention.
I have to be absolutely sure before taking business decisions, and that is why I am loath to try out new products”.
“I set greater store by service than by price.
That is why I am willing to fork out more for a service that meets my company?s needs.
I like to be told about new services, and I believe energy trends will affect the way we work.
Energy is a key part of our business, so we need an energy maintenance service”.
“Suppliers have made great strides in their offers, services and products and have negotiating muscle”.