Long duration driving is a significant cause of fatigue related accidents on motorways.
Fatigue caused by driving for extended hours can acutely impair driver’s alertness and performance.
This papers presents an artificial intelligence based system which could detect early onset of fatigue in drivers using heart rate variability (HRV) as the human physiological measure.
The detection performance of neural network was tested using a set of electrocardiogram (ECG) data recorded under laboratory conditions.
The neural network gave an accuracy of 90%.
This HRV based fatigue detection technique can be used as a fatigue countermeasure.
In recent years fatigue has been considered as one of the major cause of road accidents and has become a feature on the agenda of road safety.
Most people think of fatigue as a problem of falling asleep while driving however studies indicate that fatigue causes problems for driving performance well before the driver actually falls asleep.
Brown in 1994 defined fatigue as a disinclination to continue performing the task, and that it involves an impairment of human efficiency when work continued after the person had become aware of their fatigued state.
Brown also distinguished physical fatigue from mental fatigue (Brown, 1994).
Driver related fatigue is defined as a state of reduced mental alertness, which impairs performance of a range of cognitive and psychomotor tasks including driving (Williamson, Feyer, & Friswell, 1996).
Driver fatigue depends on factors like time of the day and sleep debt.
Lenne, Triggs and Redman in 1997 found that performance on the driving task was poorest at 0600 h and 1400 h. Sleep debt also contributes to driver fatigue and consequently reduced performance.
Fell and Black in 1997 investigated driver fatigue incidents in cities and found that 57% of drivers who had a fatigue-related incident reported insufficient sleep on the night before the incident happened.
Fatigue in drivers is a contributing factor for motor vehicle crashes.
A survey done in USA by The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in 1996 estimates that there are 56,000 sleep related road crashes annually in USA, resulting in 40,000 injuries and 1550 fatalities.
In the year 2007 in USA fatigue was implicated in at least 18% of fatal accidents and accounts for about 7% of all accidents (Smart Motorist, 2008).
In Great Britain up to 20% of serious road accidents is caused due to fatigue (The Royal Society of the Prevention of Accidents, 2001).
A study in New-Zealand in 1997 found that driver fatigue was a responsible factor in 7% of the accidents (The Royal Society of the Prevention of Accidents, 2001).
As per the survey done by Road and Traffic Authority (Australia) in the year 2002, 20% of vehicle crashes had fatigue as a contributing factor (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2002).
Numerous physiological parameters such as electroencephalography (EEG) (Lal & Craig, 2001, 2002a) and electrooculogram (EOG) (Wierwille & Ellsworth, 1994), video monitoring can be used to measure the level of fatigue.
However, very little research has been conducted in the area of applying HRV as a measure of driver fatigue and most of this area remains unexplored.
The importance of developing driver countermeasures for fatigue has been discussed previous (Lal, Craig, Boord, Kirkup, & Nguyen, 2003).
The importance of utilizing HRV as a physiological parameter to assess fatigue for purposes of developing fatigue countermeasure system is explored in this paper.
Heart rate variability provides a passive means to quantify drowsiness physiologically (Mulder, 1992).
It is defined as the measure of variation in heart beats and is calculated by analyzing the time series of beat to beat intervals (i.e., the R–R intervals) (Institute of HeartMath, 2007).
HRV has been previously used to examine mental workload (Hancock & Verwey, 1997), stress (Bornas et al., 2004; Steyvers & De Waards, 2000), and driver fatigue (Egelund, 1982).
In relation to driver fatigue, HRV can provide useful data of when fatigue becomes an issue during driving.
An increase in HRV is an indication of decrease in mental workload, which can occur in sleepy drivers over prolonged monotonous driving (Horne & Reyner, 1995).
But lower workload may also be related to lower vigilance, which can negatively impact driver performance.
HRV can be evaluated using time-based measures or frequency domain measures.
Time domain measures are common and the simplest to perform and can be assessed with calculation of the standard deviation of R–R (inter-beat) intervals (European Heart Journal, 1996).
Frequency domain analysis is based on mathematical transformations (i.e., Fast Fourier Transforms) of the signals from time domain to frequency domain (expressed in cycles per beat with varying amplitudes and frequencies).
Power spectral density (PSD) analysis provides the basic information of how power (i.e., variance) distributes as a function of frequency (American Heart Association, 1996).
Methods for calculating PSD can be classified as nonparametric and parametric.
Nonparametric (which is normally conducted using FFT) has the advantage of high processing speed and simplicity of algorithm whereas parametric (which is normally conducted using autoregressive model) has the advantage of smoother spectral components that can be distinguished independent of preselected frequency bands (American Heart Association, 1996).
Four main components which are derived from heart rate power spectrum are described in Table 1 (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, 1999).
The low frequency (LF) component (0.04–0.15 Hz) of the HRV power spectrum is influenced by both the parasympathetic and sympathetic activity whereas the high frequency (HF) component (0.15–0.4 Hz) is influenced by the parasympathetic activity (Bezerianos, Papadimitriou, & Alexopoulos, 1999).
The physiological correlates of ultra low frequency (ULF) and very low frequency (VLF) are still unknown and needs further research (Batchinsky et al., 2007).
The present study will investigate LF and HF components of HRV and fatigue effects.
The LF/HF ratio is considered to be a measure of sympathovagal balance (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, 1999).
The advantage of the frequency domain analysis is its ability to break HRV time series data into different spectrum viz.
ULF, VLF, LF and HF and thereby providing information regarding each spectrum individually.
Information related to fatigue can be obtained by analyzing LF and HF bands and deriving LF/HF ratio.
Hence the aim of the present study is to assess HRV as an indicator of driver fatigue.
Table 1.
Power spectrum components (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, 1999).
Frequency Range Ultra low frequency 0.0–0.0033 Hz Very low frequency 0.0033–0.04 Hz Low frequency 0.04–0.15 Hz High frequency 0.15–0.40 Hz
Participants and study protocol Data collected previously (Lal & Craig, 2002b) was used in this study.
However, the heart rate data from this study (Lal & Craig, 2002b) and HRV analysis on the data has not been reported previously.
Data of twelve participants were analyzed.
Subjects were recruited from a large tertiary institution and the local community and were randomly assigned to the study.
All the participants were truck drivers and had a valid drivers’ license when the test was conducted.
They had a mean age of 47 ± 11 years.
Participants selected had no medical contraindications such as severe concomitant disease, alcoholism, drug abuse, and psychological or intellectual problems which could limit compliance into the study (Lal & Craig, 2002a).
Participants performed standardized sensory motor driver simulator task in a temperature-controlled laboratory.
Participants were restricted from intake of any caffeinated drinks like coffee and tea 4 h before the study and alcohol for 24 h before the study.
Also the participants were requested to sleep 2 h less than their daily sleep period the night before the study which would increase the chances of the participants fatiguing during their performance of the continuous and monotonous driving task.
Extraction of R–R peak to measure the heart rate The R–R peak in the electrocardiogram (ECG) data is extracted using the technique specified by Tompkins (Tompkins, 1993).
The R–R interval extraction algorithm from ECG data was developed using Matlab (version 7.1, Mathworks, USA).
In order to detect the R–R peak the prerecorded raw ECG data was imported in Matlab.
This raw data was passed through a band pass filter.
The filter implemented in this algorithm was a Butterworths filter.
This band pass filter was designed to attenuate all the frequencies below 2 Hz and beyond 40 Hz.
By doing so most of the noise recorded due to muscle movements, 50-Hz powerline, baseline wanders and T-wave interference is attenuated.
The filtered data is then passed through a squaring function which is a non-linear operation.
Through this operation all the data points becomes positive and it further amplifies the higher frequencies in the signal which are mainly due to the QRS complex (Tompkins, 1993).
The R–R peaks were detected from the squared heart rate time series using a threshold value such that all the data points above the threshold value were reduced to the threshold value and all the data points below the threshold value were reduced to zero.
To further get rid of any artifact which might have crept in during ECG recording, the algorithm was further enhanced such that once a data point greater than the threshold value (which is a peak of QRS) is detected then all the data points for next 350 ms is reduced to zero (Tompkins, 1993).
The difference between the R–R peak samples is calculated and divided by the sampling rate to get the heart rate.
Fig 1 show the flowchart for extracting the heart rate and Fig 2 shows the extracted R–R data peaks which overlaps the peaks of the squared signal.
Flow chart to extract heart rate Fig 1.
Flow chart to extract heart rate.
Extracted R–R data peaks overlapped with squared signal Fig 2.
Extracted R–R data peaks overlapped with squared signal.
Calculation of power spectral density (PSD) The power spectral density algorithm to analyze HRV was developed using Matlab (version 7.1, Mathworks, USA).
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) typically decomposes a signal into its component frequencies and their amplitudes.
FFT was applied to extracted heat rate time series data into the frequency domain.
To reduce aliasing convolution was applied to the FFT data using a Hanning window (Jaffe, Fung, & Behrman, 1993).
Figs.
3 and 4 show the flow chart for generating the PSD and the PSD of one of the subject for both alert and fatigue states, respectively.
Flow chart to calculate the power spectral density (PSD) Fig 3.
Flow chart to calculate the power spectral density (PSD).
Example of power spectral density (PSD) in one of the subjects for alert state… Fig 4.
Example of power spectral density (PSD) in one of the subjects for alert state and fatigue states is shown in (a) and (b), respectively.
Note the increase in parasympathetic activity (∗) in the fatigue state.
Neural network analysis Neural network architectures are motivated by models of our own brains and nerve cells.
A neural network can be defined as an interconnection of neurons such that neuron outputs are connected, through weights, to all other neurons including themselves with both lag-free and delay connections allowed (Nguyen, 2006).
In artificial neurons, a basic computational element is often called a node or unit.
The node receives input from some other nodes or from an external source.
For each input (i = 1, 2, 3, … , n) has an associated weight, which can be modified so as to model synaptic learning.
The node computes the function of the weighted sum of its inputs: (1) where x = input to the neural network, w = weights at each connecting node, v = activation to the node, i = 1 to n = number of nodes.
The output of the node, in turn, can serve as an input to other nodes.
The weighted sum is called the activation to the node and is denoted by ‘v’.
Finally, f(·) is called the activation function of the node.
A detail of each node in a neural network is given in Fig 5.
Node in neural network Fig 5.
Node in neural network.
A basic framework of neural network can be designed by selecting architecture, activation function and learning rule.
Neural network architecture can be divided into two basic structures which are feed-forward networks and feedback networks.
Our neural network was designed using a feed-forward network in which signals, travel one way only, from inputs nodes to output nodes.
There is no feedback, that is, the output of any layer does not affect the output of the same layer (Nguyen, 2006).
Training the neural network is another important criterion which should be considered while designing the neural network.
We used supervised learning mode for training the neural network as the desired output called targets are provided by the trainer.
It involves repeated exposure to training data and iterative modification of the weights that are set to random values, until the model learns to perform the task properly (Smarasinghe, 2007).
Various learning rules like delta learning rule, and widrow-hoff learning rule can be used to train the neural network (Nguyen, 2006).
These learning rules tend to change the value of weights connecting the neurons which is in proportion to how strongly one neuron excites the other (Smarasinghe, 2007).
Different activation functions like threshold logic unit (TLU), logistic function (LF), bipolar logistic function (BLF), and hyperbolic tangent function (HTF) can be used while designing a neural network.
Activation functions also known as threshold neurons are used in neural network which transforms the output from the neuron to produce a 1 or 0 (Fig 3).
This output is compared with the target output and if the classification result is wrong, than the learning algorithm adjusts the weights to map the input data correctly to one of the two classes that is, a 1 or 0 (Smarasinghe, 2007).
The above combination can be used for designing a single layer neural network or multiple layer neural networks.
We designed a single layer neural network using the combination of bipolar logistic function as an activation function and delta learning rule (δ) as the learning rule.
Fig 6 shows the neurons, the interconnections of neurons with different weights and the bipolar logistic function.
The equation for the bipolar logistic function is reported below.
(2) where F = activation function, v = weighted sum of inputs, e = exponential function.
Neural network design Fig 6.
Neural network design.
Matlab (version 7.1, Mathworks, USA) environment was used to develop the algorithm for the neural network.
The algorithm was used to detect whether the given subject was in an alert state or a fatigue state.
Data from the 12 subjects was used to conduct neural network analysis.
Spectral image of 30 × 30 pixels was derived from the FFT data obtained to calculate the power spectral density (PSD).
The data used to obtain the spectral image acts as an input to the neural network.
The flowchart of the neural network algorithm is shown in Fig 7.
Flow chart for neural network analysis Fig 7.
Flow chart for neural network analysis.
The neural network has 900 input nodes and 2 output nodes.
Five data set each (five for alert and five for fatigue) were used to train the neural network, two data sets used for validation and five data sets were used for testing of the neural network.
The spectral image plotted from the PSD was the input given to the neural network, yielded an accuracy of 90% when tested with the six data sets.
Different learning constants ranging from 0.001 to 1 were used to train the neural network so as to increase the accuracy level.
The highest accuracy of 90% was obtained by using a learning constant of 0.5.
The cyclic error curve of the neural network which was the difference between the desired output and the actual output is shown in Fig 8.
It can be observed from the curve in Fig 7 that error reduces to minimum and hence the neural network converges to the desired output.
Cyclic error curve Fig 8.
Cyclic error curve.
Apart from power spectrum results being used for neural network analysis, it also provides the ability to distinguish between parasympathetic (HF) and sympathetic (LF) activity with LF/HF ratio being the sympathovagal balance (European Heart Journal, 1996).
These LF/HF ratios were plotted across all twelve subjects to determine whether a similar trend could be observed.
Table 2 lists the LF/HF ratio of alert and fatigue states and Fig 9 shows the graph plotted from the same data.
Table 2.
LF/HF ratio for alert and fatigue states in 12 subject.
Subject LF/HF (alert) LF/HF (fatigue) 1 1.03 0.27 2 2.58 0.75 3 0.60 1.68 4 2.88 1.70 5 2.69 2.57 6 2.56 0.85 7 1.64 1.10 8 1.37 0.65 9 4.02 2.90 10 0.50 0.20 11 0.59 0.50 12 0.72 0.71 Average 1.8 ± 1.15 1.2 ± 0.87 LF/HF ratio of 12 participants (where LF is low frequency and HF is high… Fig 9.
LF/HF ratio of 12 participants (where LF is low frequency and HF is high frequency).
Statistical analysis To identify a difference between LF/HF ratio during alert and fatigue states nonparametric analysis was performed using a dependent sample Wilcoxon matched pairs test.
The mean and standard deviation of LF/HF ratio for alert state was (1.7 ± 1.1) and that of fatigue state was (1.2 ± 0.9).
LF/HF ratio was significantly lower during fatigue as compared to the alert state (T = 8.0, Z = 2.4, p = 0.01).
This study examined the use of HRV and neural network to detect fatigue in drivers.
The accuracy of the neural network was substantially high at 90%.
As we had a limited amount of data set the accuracy of the neural network cannot be validated entirely.
In order to validate the accuracy we need to have more data sets for training, validating and testing.
The HRV spectrum analysis gives a direct relationship between fatigue and the HRV.
Egelund (1982) has also reported that there were significant association between the distance driven by the driver and HRV in the region 0.05–0.15 Hz (0.1 Hz HRV).
As the HRV is analyzed over a range of 5 min the lower bands of the HRV spectrum the ULF and VLF does not have any importance and hence the analysis of these frequencies should be avoided over the short term recording (European Heart Journal, 1996).
The distribution of power and the central frequency of LF and HF are not fixed but may vary in relation to changes in autonomic modulations of heart period.
Decreases in the LF/HF state has been previously related to a more drowsy state (Byeon, Hans, Min, Wo, & Park, 2006), while increases in LF/HF tend to indicate greater mental workload or alertness (Sato, Kamada, Miyake, Kumashiro, & Kume, 1998).
As stated in Table 2 it was observed that the LF/HF ratio decreased with increase in fatigue.
This is indicative of a decline in driving control and performance in drivers.
Hence LF/HF ratio could serve as an indicator of fatigue.
Neural network which provided an accuracy of 90% was derived only on the basis of HRV analysis.
The accuracy of neural network can be improved in different ways.
As the HRV varies with different individuals, data from more subjects with different physiology should be collected and used for training the neural network.
This will provide the neural network with sufficient learning on different variations in HRV and hence would further increase the accuracy of the neural network.
Architecture of neural network also plays an important role in the accuracy of the neural network.
The present neural network was designed using a single layer network.
The accuracy can further be increased by designing a multi-layer neural network (Smarasinghe, 2007).
Research to detect fatigue using different human physiology has been conducted previously (Brown, 1994; Lal et al., 2003; Ying, Jing, & Zhou, 2007).
Artaud et al.
in 1994 used the driver’s breathing regularity as a prediction to fatigue.
EEG has proved to be a useful human physiological measure to detect fatigue but electrodes need to be mounted on the scalp of the drivers.
External tools like video recording of driver’s face can be used to detect fatigue but its feasibility is unknown even though many systems are available.
The findings of this study suggests that HRV which provides a measurable physiological signature of fatigue during driving, can be used along with neural network or any other artificial intelligence systems for development of in-vehicle alerting and warning devices.
Therefore, HRV may be used for developing fatigue countermeasures in order reduce the detrimental effects of fatigue upon driving.
Further studies are required to confirm the above findings with larger sample size.
Future studies should also performed using multilayer neural network, which may have the potential of increasing the accuracy of the countermeasure algorithm.
1 Data Analyst and Software Developer.
2 Principal Academic Supervisor.
Tel.
: +61 02 9514 1592; fax: +61 02 9514 8206.
3 Ph.D.
Candidate.
Tel.
: +61 02 9514 8311; fax: +61 02 9514 8206.
4 Principal Industry Supervisor.
Tel.
: +61 02 8307 5100; fax: +61 02 9660 9429.