Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is a situation where repeatedly upper airway stops off while the respiratory effort continues during sleep at least for 10 s. Apart from polysomnography, many researchers have concentrated on exploring alternative methods for OSAS detection.
However, not much work has been done on using non-Gaussian and nonlinear behavior of the electroencephalogram (EEG) signals.
Bispectral analysis is an advanced signal processing technique particularly used for exhibiting quadratic phase-coupling that may arise between signal components with different frequencies.
From this perspective, in this study, a new technique for recognizing patients with OSAS was introduced using bispectral characteristics of EEG signal and an artificial neural network (ANN).
The amount of Quadratic phase coupling (QPC) in each subband of EEG (namely; delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma) was calculated over bispectral density of EEG.
Then, these QPCs were fed to the input of the designed ANN.
The neural network was configured with two outputs: one for OSAS and one for estimation of normal situation.
With this technique a global accuracy of 96.15% was achieved.
The proposed technique could be used in designing automatic OSAS identification systems which will improve medical service.
Sleep is one of the most essential physiologic daily needs for maintenance of mental and physical health.
Beyond the middle age, the upper respiratory tracts of some of individuals could shrink and consequently lead to obstruction of the nasal passages and snoring during sleep.
This situation, so called apnea, could affect the quality of sleep and health when it occurs frequently, and may even cause death in severe cases.
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is the most common form of this sleep disorder.
It has clinically been defined as the stoppage of breathing for more than ten seconds and continues in cyclic fashion at least fife times per hour on average, and as the patient wakes up the resumption period of breathing should occur continuously for more than 3 s (Sugi, Nakamura, Shimokawa, & Kawana, 2003).
OSAS is usually diagnosed in clinics through the analysis of a collection of biological signals attained by means of polysomnograph (PSG) device which facilitated to measure the chest and abdominal breathing efforts, nasal and oral airflows, blood-oxygen saturation (SpO2) as well as with Electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiogram (ECG).
The EEG as the noninvasive measure of electrical brain waves associate with the functional information processing biological mechanisms performing diverse processes from simple sensations to complicated memory events (Bullock, 1993; Singer & Gray, 1995).
The EEG naturally could have been modulated by internal and external pathologic conditions which may be captured by sophisticated signal processing techniques.
Brain waves and so the EEG signals, therefore, consist of a multitude of nonstationary complex valued components with various energy levels generated during large-scale brain dynamics in accordance with the information processing, plus, if there is any, the pathologically induced mimics.
The spectral content of EEG basically has been documented as: delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma.
Interestingly, during sleep when apnea starts an abrupt shift in frequency range of EEG signal occurs, and as apnea ends up the frequency of EEG recovers back to the normal range.
That is, the sleep EEG activity shifts from delta wave range to theta and alpha waves range.
This phenomenon has been used as a criterion for identifying OSAS (Dennis, 1990).
OSAS may occur for 10 s or more when a patient falls asleep during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep.
When breathing becomes normal, brain waves tend to shift up to a relatively higher frequency band such as theta and alpha (Akin, Arserim, Kiymik, & Turkoglu, 2001; Fairbanks, Mickelson, & Woodson, 2003).
Bispectral analysis is an advanced signal processing technique particularly used for exhibiting quadratic phase-coupling that may arise between signal components with different frequencies.
The research done on bispectrum analysis of EEG is limited.
The first report on bispectral analysis of EEG was published by Barnett et al.
in 1971 (Barnett, Johnson, & Naitoh, 1971).
Sigl and Chamoun (1994) introduced the detailed principles and concept of bispectral analysis in 1994.
Later on Ning and Bronzino (1989) reported the changes of bispectrum of rat’s EEG during various vigilance states, and Muthuswamy, Sherman, and Thakor (1999) reported the bispectral analysis of burst patterns in EEG.
This analytic technique is also known as the essence of the technology of the bispectral index system (BIS) monitoring (Aspect Medical Systems, Natick, MA).
Nonetheless, not much emphasis has been placed on the detection and characterization of nonlinear properties in the EEG signals.
Although bispectral analysis involves complicated mathematics, today’s computers are powerful enough to overcome this problem, and bispectral measurements have been proposed for monitoring EEG from another perspective (Johansen & Sebel, 2000).
Even though bispectral density provides more information than conventional power spectral density, its interpretation is much difficult, needs expertise.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are computerized simple models of biological nervous system, capable of recognizing complex patterns in the data.
They can be applied to complex problems because of their capability of analyzing a large number of linear as well as nonlinear variables without knowledge of the relationships between the variables.
Neural networks are first trained by presenting a set of data that is desired to be learned by the network and then the trained neural network utilized for assessing the data previously not encountered.
This approach is the basic systematic artificial intelligence model used for prediction of the outcome of a system.
In this perspective ANNs have been shown to outperform physician impression or prediction (Bottaci, Drew, & Hartley, 1997; Tourassi, Floyd, & Sostman, 1993) and to equal or exceed traditional statistical modeling (Kennedy, Harrison, & Burton, 1997; Pilon & Tandberg, 1997).
Such ANNs have also been successfully used in variety of medical applications, including the prediction of acute myocardial infarction in patients (Baxt, 1991), the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (Patil, Henry, & Rubenfire, 1993; Scott & Palmer, 1993), and the determination of the length of patient’s stay in intensive care unit (ICU) (Danter, Wood, & Morrison, 1996).
Recently, ANNs which excel in pattern recognition tasks have been utilized for classification of spectral patterns of dose-dependent EEG that changed in response to level of sedation (Veselis, Reinsel, & Wronski, 1993).
Together with bispectral analysis ANNs also have been utilized for classification of EEG patterns during propofol anesthesia with intentional awareness incidents (Watt, Sisemore, Kanemoto, & Polson, 1996).
Multilayer perceptron neural networks (MLPNNs) which have features such as smaller training set, fast operations, and ease of implementation are the most popular models used in medical applications.
Despite of that such a network can be trained by various sophisticated training algorithms, the frequently used and the efficient one is the backpropagation algorithm.
In this study ANN and bispectral analysis were integrated and conducted on the EEG data to differentiate OSAS from benign patients.
It was shown that a well trained ANN could accurately estimate as well as classify OSAS patients from clinical EEG data.
Subjects and database preparation The polysomnograms of 15 OSAS and 5 normal patients of mean age 36 ± 8 (mean ± SD) years, body mass index (BMI) 32 ± 4 kg/m2 were analyzed.
The data were recorded while patients were sleeping for 7–8 hours.
All subjects were free of any cardiac history.
The diagnosis was done based on clinical symptoms and polysomnographic (PSG) outcomes.
PSG study included EEG (channel C3-A2, sampling frequency, fs = 256 Hz), left and right electrooclugrams (EOG) (fs = 128 Hz), thoracic and abdominal effort signals (fs = 256 Hz), oronasal airflow, oxygen saturation (SaO2), electromyogram (EMG) (fs = 512 Hz) and electrocardiogram (ECG) (fs = 128 Hz).
All of the recordings were performed in accordance with the medical ethical standards (Potter, 1971).
The PSG was scored manually according to standard criteria (AASM, 1999; Rechtschaffen & Kales, 1968) by two experts with extended experience of interpreting sleep data and rated for OSAS.
They had identified 2500 OSAS signals and 2500 normal EEG signals from the whole EEG data by way of benefiting from the characteristic sign of the OSAS disorder which is that, during OSAS occurrence while nasal and oral airflow signals are reducing the EEG signal shifts to higher frequencies as shown in Fig 1.
The duration of each signal sample was 10 s (2560 data points) which is the minimum obstruction duration for an OSAS.
The signal characteristic of OSAS disease Fig 1.
The signal characteristic of OSAS disease.
The bispectral analysis As a statistical process the bispectrum, has been found to identify phase relationships (such as phase couplings) of the components of a time signal having different frequency bands (Hinich & Clay, 1968; Nikias & Petropulu, 1993; Sigl & Chamoun, 1994) in connection to the power spectrum.
It is the Fourier transform of the second-order cumulant, R(t1, t2), (the autocorrelation function).
In contrast to power spectrum, bispectrum reveals a non-Gaussian and nonlinear information which allows the detection of nonlinear characteristics and characterization of nonlinear mechanisms such as brain.
It produces time series through phase relations of their harmonic components.
For a discrete, stationary and zero-mean random process, x(n), the third-order cumulant sequence R(m, n) has been defined in terms of its third-moment sequence as: (1) where E[.]
denotes the expectation operation.
Transforming the third-order cumulant into frequency domain yields the bispectrum, (2) where W(m, n) is a two-dimensional window function employed to reduce the variance of the bispectrum.
Eq (2) can equivalently be expressed in terms of the Fourier transform of x(n) as: (3) In general B(ω1, ω2) is a complex function.
It exists if R(m, n) is absolutely summable.
Due to the symmetry properties of R(m, n), the B(ω1, ω2) possesses symmetry properties given as (4) The whole spectral information of the signal can be attained in the triangular region defined as 0 ⩽ ω2 ⩽ ω1, ω1 + ω2 ⩽ π.
Other regions in B(ω1, ω2) are just the symmetric copies of this particular region.
If a well concentrated peak does emerge at frequency ω1 + ω2 in this triangular region, due to the nonlinear quadratic dependency, this peak is called quadratic phase coupling (QPC) at frequencies (ω1, ω2) (Raghuveer & Nikias, 1985).
If two smooth peaks do emerge at frequencies ω1 and ω2 it suggests that there is not such a phase coupling.
The phase coupled components contribute to the third-order cumulant sequence of a process, and give extra information about the signal.
This unique property of bispectrum is a useful tool that can be used to detect and quantify the possible existence of QPCs in the EEG signals, and possibly differentiate the normals from OSAS patients.
The bicoherence measure is the normalized version of the bispectrum, extensively used to study the correlation between two simultaneously measured signals in frequency domain.
Bicoherence is an auto-quantity which can be computed from a single time signal.
While the one dimensional coherence function provides a quantification of deviations from linearity between the input and output measurement sensors of the system, the bicoherence measures the proportion of the signal energy at any bifrequency that is quadratically phase coupled.
Bicoherence has been defined by Huber et al.
as (Huber, Kleiner, Gasser, & Dumermuth, 1971), (5) where B(ω1, ω2) and P(ωx) are the bispectrum and the power spectrums of the process, respectively.
In order to reduce the computation time the bispectrum estimation mostly performed through the direct method that uses Fast Fourier Transform algorithm (Brillinger, 1965).
In practice, however, first the power spectrum and then the bicoherence are estimated, only if there are peaks at harmonically related positions, then B(ω1, ω2) is calculated in order to measure the degree of phase coupling.
In the bispectrum pattern, as mentioned above, the main frequency components of the signal concentrate at f1 = f2 while the phase couplings mediated between the components in different frequencies can concentrate at any region on (f1, f2) where f1 ≠ f2.
To quantify the QPC, one can take the advantage of quantification of non-Gaussianity, which has a direct relation to phase coupling, of a random process as the sum of the magnitudes of the estimated bicoherence given by (Ning & Bronzino, 1989), (6) The bispectrums obtained from the EEG of patients, which could be with OSAS, was segmented into subbands which usually standardized to EEG spectrum as Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta and Gamma, and then the QPC associated to these regions were quantified and used for detection of patients with OSAS.
The artificial neural network A NN, resembles to a biological neuronal system, consists of one input layer, one or more hidden layers, and one output layer.
The information signal enters into input layer, distributes to each unit in the hidden layers and then to the output layer through some weighted links modeling dendrites and synapses.
Each unit sums the incoming input signals and produces a value at its output with a transfer function, which is usually nonlinear, modeling the function of soma.
Network design starts with no prior knowledge of hidden layers.
Determination of an appropriate number of hidden layers is critical: for instance, a network with a few hidden nodes is incapable of differentiating between complex patterns, while a network with too many hidden nodes is only pursuing the noise in the data and so leading to a poor generalization.
Also, the training period becomes time-consuming if the network has a large number of hidden layers.
The most popular approach for finding the optimal number of hidden layers is trial and error (Basheer & Hajmeer, 2000; Haykin, 1994).
Training algorithms are also of the essential parts of the NNs.
An appropriate NN topology may still fail to give a better result, unless it is trained by a suitable algorithm.
A good algorithm reduces the NN’s learning time and achieves a better accuracy.
There are a number of training algorithms used for training NNs, the most popular and frequently used one is the backpropagation algorithm (Basheer & Hajmeer, 2000; Guler & Ubeyli, 2004; Haykin, 1994) which minimizes the output error as controlling the system in a feedback manner.
The output error, as the deviation of the current output from the desired output, can be measured in several ways such as sum square error (SSE) and mean square error (MSE) (Basheer & Hajmeer, 2000; Fausett, 1994; Haykin, 1994).
NNs are usually used in classification, regression and control systems.
In classification, the aim is to assign the input patterns to one of several classes, usually achieved by means of the probability of class membership ranged from 0 to 1.
While the classification is carried out, a specific pattern is assigned to a specific class according to the prearranged characteristic features.
Cross-validation is also a considerable criterion in the design and performance evaluation of NNs used for stopping the training phase of the network.
In general, it may be believed that as the number of iterations is increased the network will learn the training set better.
In contrast, as the network is trained too much the network memorizes the training patterns and does not generalize well.
On the other hand, the decrease in the output error does not always mean to have a better performance.
So, a systematic training procedure including cross-validation criterion can hold the key to maximization of generalization of NN with an accurate solution (Basheer & Hajmeer, 2000).
In this particular study, a neural network consisting of one input layer, two hidden layers, and one output layer was developed.
The commonly used bipolar sigmoid function given by Eyfe (1996) (7) was used as the activation function, and the output error was measured by means of SSE and plotted.
The EEG signals were recorded from patients with 256 Hz sampling frequency.
First, the recorded data were classified by two experts, and then 2500 OSAS and 2500 normal events/signals from the classified data were employed for analysis.
150 of OSAS events and 150 of normal events were randomly chosen for training the network.
To control the training phase in the system design, 20 of the training data set (15 OSAS subjects and 5 normal subjects, which were previously known) were chosen for testing the designed system as cross-validation.
The remaining data (2350 normal and 2350 OSASs) were tested afterward.
The strategy representing the overall proposed method for EEG classification is shown in Fig 2.
Each EEG sample taken for analysis was with 10 s duration (that is the minimum obstruction duration for an OSAS) and consequently 2560 samples which require a big number of input nodes for NN.
To minimize the number of data to be input to NN the EEG samples were first evaluated through the bispectral analysis and/or bicoherence through the pre-processing module.
In the calculation of bispectras a Hanning window having a width of 0.1 s was used.
The obtained bispectra were appraised over the triangular holding the whole spectral information mentioned in the previous section.
This triangular region was segmented as: Delta (δ) 0.5–4 Hz, i.e., 0.5 Hz < (f1, f2) < 4 Hz, Theta (θ) 4–8 Hz, i.e., 4 Hz < (f1, f2) < 8 Hz, Alpha (α) 8–13 Hz, i.e., 8 Hz < (f1, f2) < 13 Hz, Beta (β) 13–32 Hz, i.e., 13 Hz < (f1, f2) < 32 Hz, Gamma (γ) 32–64 Hz, i.e., 32 Hz < (f1, f2) < 64 Hz.
Structure of the proposed estimation method Fig 2.
Structure of the proposed estimation method.
The QPC energy remaining under the delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma frequency bands of EEG were quantified via Eq (6) and the developed computerized image scanning program.
These quantified relative data were then given as inputs to the classification module.
As an example, two EEG segments, recorded from a 45-years-old male, with their power spectral density and bispectrums were shown in Fig 3.
In the figure; A, is a normal EEG and B, is an EEG with OSAS event.
EEG signals and their corresponding spectrum and bispectrum: A-EEG for normal… Fig 3.
EEG signals and their corresponding spectrum and bispectrum: A-EEG for normal event, B-EEG during OSAS event.
As seen, in Fig 3B a highly-flavored as well as complex shaped phase coupling between EEG components is present in the bispectrum.
For classification, a multilayer NN whose characteristic features are given in Table 1 was designed.
Table 1.
Features of the constructed neural network.
Layer number 4 (one input, two hidden and one output) Size of input layer 5 × 300 Size of hidden layers 10 Size of output layer 2 × 1 Learning rate 0.05 Performance function SSE (sum-squared error) Training parameter goal 0.0005 Momentum coefficient 0.95 Activation function Bipolar sigmoid The designed NN was successfully trained with the training data set and validated with the testing data set discussed above.
The training phase was monitored via the SSE between the current and the desired outputs as in Fig 4, which shows the rate of the convergence of the training problem versus iterations.
As the network learns, the error converges to zero.
Here, a notable effort was spent in the training of NN to achieve a sensitive decision mechanism.
In the training phase it was avoided from over-training of the network to not lead any over-fitting or memorization which consequently reduces the general performance of the NN for the test set and prospective prediction or classification study.
Using cross-validation technique the training phase was controlled, and as the SSE reached a small constant value (5 × 10−4 after 7814 iterations in this case) the training of the network was stopped.
In fact, the value of this small constant depends on the situation and judgment made relative to the error value appropriate for the problem.
The convergent situation of the trained ANN Fig 4.
The convergent situation of the trained ANN.
The designed NN with the parameters given in Table 1 did not demonstrate any instability or roughness in the training process which implies the consistency of these chosen parameters.
After all the data were tested, the obtained results were compared with the experts’ interpretation.
The overall performance of the network is given in Table 2.
A global accuracy of 96.15% was achieved which is good enough for the over all system to be considered successful in classification.
Table 2.
Classification performance of the ANN to test signals.
OSAS Normal Total True detection 2212 2307 4519 False detection 138 43 181 Accuracy (%) 94.13 98.17 96.15
Obviously pathologic conditions usually modulate EEG signal, as in this case, can be detected by signal processing means.
An EEG signal, during an OSAS exposes higher bispectral peaks than in the normal EEG signal, before OSAS.
The finding through this particular method might imply that brain activity involves much complex or chaotic processes during OSAS that generally emerges an EEG with different signal components in different frequency bands which cause a higher degree of phase coupling.
In other words, as the patient goes through the apnea the nonlinearity in the brain dynamics increases compared to the EEG before OSAS.
In the present study, the high rate of phase coupling detected in the bispectrum, which particularly concentrated over the region of the interest was successfully used for OSAS estimation using NN with an accuracy of 96.15 %.
In the direction of OSAS estimation, Haja, Behbehani, Yen, Lucas, and Burk (1999) used flow spectral analysis and fuzzy logic in order to differentiate normal sleep and sleep apnea event.
They divided the flow signal measured by pneumotachometer into 6 s long segments, and used the spectra of these signal segments as input to the fuzzy logic program to differentiate between normal and sleep apnea.
They have reported a high sensitivity (99.6%) in differentiating between normal and apnea events.
Nonetheless, an apneic event may not complete in 6 seconds, considering the reports stating that the complete cessation of breathing prolongs more than 10 s in adults (AASM, 1999).
It was observed that the longest the period of EEG taken into account for apnea detection the poorer the accuracy that one can get.
Tian and and Liu (2005) used the feature extraction of airflow and SaO2 for feeding to the neural network input.
They found a sensitivity rate of 90.7% and 80.8%, a specificity rate of 86.4% and 81.4% for apnea and hypopnea detection, respectively.
Maier, Bauch, and Dickhaus (2000) used a single channel of ECG signal and evaluated through a second order polynomial classifier for apnea detection.
Their method has been successful with an accuracy of 93%.
Bispectral analysis has not been widely applied to EEG analysis because of being technically more difficult than the conventional power spectral analysis to implement.
Also the interpretation of bispectrum is quite difficult.
Despite of these difficulties we have shown that ANNs can be successfully applied to the concentrated patterns on the bispectrum and recognize or differentiate the EEG with OSAS from the normal EEG signal.
Since bispectrum conveys more information about a time-varying signal than power spectrum, this technique can offer more potential for clinical utility.
A correlation between inter-frequency phase-coherence of cortical EEG and levels of consciousness may reflect phase coherent synchronization over large spatial regions mediated by deeper brain structures.
This study is a first trial in using bispectrum of EEG to detect OSAS, however, can be improved by further studies and an automated system can be designed.
It also can be integrated into the present polysomnographs for automatic OSAS identification which may reduce the diagnosis time and improve the medical service efficiency.