A new trend of researches on knowledge discovery and chance discovery is to identify human insights through data synthesis rather than to discover facts through data analysis.
In this paper, we propose a systematic approach named idea discovery which is committed to turning data into effective human insights.
Idea discovery focuses on dynamic and sustainable process for high-quality ideas cultivation, construction, integration and evaluation through human–computer and human–human interaction.
It mainly relies on latent information and its dynamic changes to drive ideas creation, integration and evaluation during sustainable creativity process.
The process of idea discovery is in accordance with a dynamic model which contains two key components: (1) mining algorithms to turn data into scenario maps for eliciting human insights; (2) scenario-based creativity support activities towards actionable ideas generation.
An intelligence system called Galaxy integrated with IdeaGraph algorithm has been developed to support the dynamic process of idea discovery.
A case study in an automobile company has validated the effectiveness of proposed method and system.
Text-based knowledge discovery is increasingly playing an important role in scientific discovery.
It is helpful for researchers to manage valuable information and identify facts in text data that would solve practical problems.
On the other hand, early researches on literature-based discovery (LBD) are focused on the scientific field of biomedicine.
Swanson (1986) made a new discovery in text literatures and proposed a hypothesis that fish oil could cure Raynaud’s disease.
Finally, he tested the hypothesis experimentally and clinically (Swanson, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989).
To solve the complexity of text processing, information retrieval (IR) and information extraction (IE) are used to develop system tools to support discovery process (Gordon & Lindsay, 1996; Lindsay & Gordon, 1999; Swanson & Smalheiser, 1997, 1998; Weeber, Klein, de Jong-van den Berg, & Vos, 2001).
For text-based understanding, information extraction potentially offers better support than information retrieval as it can extract useful information and relations expressed in the text documents.
It is a good way to interpret extracted information by visualizing terms and relationships graphically (Mack & Hehenberger, 2002).
Text-based knowledge discovery is also widely applied in other areas.
For instance, criminal investigators may make use of text data to uncover evidence.
A general framework is proposed by combining information extraction techniques with visual exploration techniques to provide an approach to make evidence discovery (Chen et al., 2004; Louris & Engelbrecht, 2011).
In business, patent-based discovery is used by enterprises or stakeholders to timely be aware of the situation and direction of current technologies so as to rapidly adjust their market strategies (Chen et al., 2004; Fattori, Pedrazzi, & Turra, 2003; Losiewicz, Oard, & Kostoff, 2000).
Chance Discovery, proposed by Ohsawa in 2000, is a relatively new research field as an extension of text-based knowledge discovery.
It is a human–computer interaction process to detect rare but important chances for decision making.
A chance means to understand an unnoticed event or situation which might be uncertain but significant for a decision (Ohsawa & McBurney, 2003).
A core visualization tool called KeyGraph can generate scenario map to aid human’s value cognition the double-helix process of chance discovery.
In fact, KeyGraph is a keyword extraction algorithm from a single document using co-occurrence graph (Ohsawa, Benson, & Yachida, 1998).
That is, a document is represented as a graph where each node corresponds to a term and each edge means the co-occurrence of two terms.
Based on the segmentation of a graph into clusters, KeyGraph extracts keywords by selecting the terms which strongly co-occurs with clusters.
Fig 1 shows a scenario map visualized by KeyGraph.
The red1 nodes are considered as chance candidates because they act as a bridge linking different sub-scenarios.
Human are required to understand and interpret the importance of chance candidates that can make the situation transfer from one sub-scenario to another.
Later, Ohsawa (2005) proposed a breaking-through method named data crystallization where dummy nodes representing invisible events are inserted into the processed text data, and then new data is visualized by KeyGraph.
However, the complex algorithm and graph obtained were hard for users to understand, thus Maeno and Ohsawa (2007) subsequently present a new method, human–computer interactive annealing, for revealing latent structures and discovering dark events.
Based on chance discovery, Hong (2009) proposes an interactive human–computer process model called Qualitative Chance Discovery Model (QCDM) to extract more accurate data representation in scenario map for decision making on potential chances.
A scenario map visualized by KeyGraph Fig 1.
A scenario map visualized by KeyGraph.
In recent years, a scenario map generated by KeyGraph with data crystallization has been applied as the game board in Innovators Market Game ® (IMG) and Innovators Marketplace ® (IM) for innovative chance discovery (Ohsawa, 2009; Ohsawa, Okamoto, Takahashi, & Nishihara, 2010, 2012).
In particular, human cognition of KeyGaph scenario map has been expanded from sensing bridge-like chances to creating chances through combining black nodes, see Fig 2.
Wang and Ohsawa (2012a, 2012b) have proposed a systematic approach with IMG for ideas creation and evaluation, and have applied such an approach in product design.
To improve IMG, a customer-centric creativity support techique, 4W-IMG, has been proposed (Wang & Ohsawa, 2011).
Creating a chance by combinational thinking in IMG Fig 2.
Creating a chance by combinational thinking in IMG.
Although many relevant researches have successfully achieved knowledge discovery and business chance discovery for decision making, a new trend in discovery researches is to identify true human insights through data synthesis rather than data analysis.
In this research, we propose a novel systematic approach named idea discovery which extends static discovery into dynamic discovery in three dimensions.
A hypothesis is proposed that latent information would be captured across different dimensions.
Section 2 summarizes current discovery pattern and introduces the process of dynamic discovery.
Idea discovery with a dynamic model is presented in Section 3.
In Section 4, a mining algorithm called IdeaGraph as a key component of idea discovery is presented for discovering more latent information (event and their relations).
A case study in automobile industry is described in Section 5 and the conclusion is in Section 6.
Previous researches on text-based knowledge discovery and chance discovery both combine two complementary processes.
One is the process of Computer’s text data mining and visualization; the other is the process of human’s cognition, understanding, interpretation and innovation.
Fig 3 shows a basic framework of current discovery pattern.
A basic framework of discovery pattern Fig 3.
A basic framework of discovery pattern.
Dynamic discovery is commonly used by enterprises to evaluate and understand technology trends through patent data analysis, and eventually achieve a strategic advantage.
Kim, Suh, and Park (2008) proposes a patent map visualization method, but it fails to automatically track the changes of patent trends in different periods.
Shih, Liu, and Hsu (2010) overcome the problem and propose a patent trend mining method to automatically identify changes of patent trends without specialist knowledge.
In this paper, dynamic discovery focuses on discovering dynamic changes of event points and their relationship/links through the comparison of two consecutive scenario maps in time series.
Fig 4 shows the dynamic change process of event points and their relationship in different scenario maps, i.e., the status of event points or their relationship changing from nonexistence/high frequency at T0 to low frequency at T1 to high frequency/nonexistence at T2.
Dynamic changes of event points and their relationship in time series Fig 4.
Dynamic changes of event points and their relationship in time series.
Idea discovery, as an extension and evolution of previous discovery researches, is a dynamic and sustainable process for high-quality ideas cultivation, construction, generation and evaluation through human–computer and human–human interaction.
Idea discovery not only works on rare and important event points, but also focuses on latent and significant event relationship and the dynamic changes of these events and their relationship.
Therefore, idea discovery is committed to digging up latent information (event points and their relationship) and its dynamic changes through static and dynamic discovery, for more actionable ideas creation, integration and evaluation.
Fig 5 reveals a dynamic model of idea discovery process and the details are presented as below: Step 1: Data gathering and preprocessing.
Determine the objective of task and select relevant data.
And then text data is preprocessed into a group of basket data sets denoted by D, each row of which is a basket data set.
For example, P1, P2, P3 and P4, these four items constitute a basket data set.
Step 2: Scenario map visualization.
Preprocessed data D is mined by a mining algorithm and the result is finally visualized into a scenario map.
Here, we apply IdeaGraph algorithm presented in next section.
IdeaGraph is a novel algorithm to generate a rich scenario map for human cognition, comprehension, interpretation and innovation.
IdeaGraph not only works on discovering more rare and significant events, but also focuses on uncovering latent relationship among events.
Step 3: Scenario maps comparison.
This step refers to a choice of discovery pattern: static discovery or dynamic discovery.
If a dynamic discovery is needed, current and previous scenario map will be compared to detect dynamic changes of latent information.
As mentioned previously, dynamic changes refer to an event point or an event relationship changing from nonexistence to low frequency to high frequency, and vise verse.
If a static discovery is chosen, scenario map will be provided for static discovery process.
Step 4: Static and dynamic discovery.Table 1 illustrates two kinds of discovery pattern in idea discovery.
Table 1.
Static and dynamic discovery in idea discovery.
Static discovery Dynamic discovery Scenario map Single Multiple Thinking mode Combination/Analogy/Reasoning Dynamic observation Observed objects Event points & relationship (nodes and links in map) Changes of event points & relationship (status changes of nodes and links in map) One pattern is static discovery where user groups obtain value cognition from scenario map and come up with new ideas by combinational, analogical and reasoning thinking.
Reasoning thinking needs directed scenario map, so IdeaGraph algorithm is also used to generate directed map.
The other is dynamic discovery.
Human is able to conceive new ideas through dynamic observation.
Here, a tool is needed to track dynamic changes of each event point and their relationship by comparing before and after scenario maps.
In static discovery, a group brainstorming or innovation game can be used to accelerate the discovery process.
Here, a Web-based creativity support system called iChance is applied for collective intelligence (Wang & Ohsawa, 2011, 2012a).
A group of new basket data sets is output from iChance.
Each basket data set in indicates how a new idea is created.
For instance, a user creates a new Idea 1 with consideration of event P2, event P5 and Cognition 1.
In fact, an Idea is a meta-cognition through value synthesis.
Step 5: Data Synthesis.
The synthesized data Syn_ is obtained by adding into the end of D. Step 6: Idea discovery process iteration.
Return to Step 2 for a new round of idea discovery.
IdeaGraph is applied again to generate a new scenario map, and dynamic discovery may be carried out by comparing current new scenario map with previous map.
A dynamic model of idea discovery process Fig 5.
A dynamic model of idea discovery process.
In this section, we introduce a human-oriented algorithm called IdeaGraph which can generate a rich scenario graph for human’s comprehension, interpretation and innovation.
IdeaGraph not only works on discovering more rare and significant chance events, but also focuses on uncovering latent relationship among them.
Suppose that data has been preprocessed into .
Fig 6 shows a scenario map formation process by IdeaGraph and the algorithm is presented as below: Step 1: Generating general clusters.
The relationship between two items is measured by their conditional probability.
That is, the relationship of any two items, Ii and Ij, is calculated by Eq (1).
And then the pairs whose R(x, y) are greater than preset threshold r are linked by solid line in the graph G. In this way, general clusters are obtained and denoted by Ci.
(1) Step 2: Obtaining cognitive clusters.Cognitive Cluster is defined as a cluster which contains rich information but should be small enough for human cognition and interpretation.
To obtain cognitive cluster, information and information density, these two indicators are employed to quantify general clusters generated in Step 1.
The definition of information is the sum of R(Ii, Ij) of all the edges in a general cluster.
The information density is defined that the information of a cluster is divided by the number of items in the cluster.
That means the information density of a cluster is the information of each item in this cluster.
Thus the equations of information and information density are (2) (3) where Ii or Ij is an item of a cluster C and Ne indicates the number of items in the cluster C. Eq (4) is derived from merging Eqs.
(2) and (3).
Therefore, each general cluster is measured by the harmonic average of these two indicators.
(4) Eq (4) indicates that it favors the cluster which has fewer items when two general clusters have the same information.
Therefore, all general clusters are ranked by their ClusterVal (C) in a descending order and parts of them are chosen as cognitive clusters denoted by CC through picking up the top Nc clusters.
Step 3: Capturing valuable links.
Calculate the relationship between each item and each cognitive cluster by Eq (5).
(5) where ck is an item of a cognitive cluster CC and Ii is an item outside the cluster CC.
Then, item-cluster pairs are sorted and the top M1 pairs are selected to be linked by red dot line.
The new items are added if they do not appear in the graph G. Step 4: Extracting key items.
A key item is the item which has strong relationship with all the other cognitive clusters and newly added items in Step 3.
The key value Key(I) of an item is calculated by Eq (6).
(6) All items are sorted by their Key(I) and the top Nk items are taken as key items which are added in the graph G if they do not exist.
The formation process of a scenario map using IdeaGraph algorithm Fig 6.
The formation process of a scenario map using IdeaGraph algorithm.
An overview of Galaxy An intelligence system named Galaxy has been developed to support the process of idea discovery based on a dynamic discovery model shown in Fig 5.
IdeaGraph has been integrated into the Galaxy system.
Besides, Galaxy employs an automatic graph layout algorithm to visualize directed and undirected graphs (Fruchterman & Reingold, 1991).
Fig 7 shows a screen shot of Galaxy.
There are five main modules in Galaxy: Solution Explorer, Graph Viewer, Metadata Display, Data Dialog Box and Dynamic Discovery.
A screen shot of Galaxy system Fig 7.
A screen shot of Galaxy system.
The operations using Galaxy system Solution Explorer can assist users to manage and view different project files and each project includes relevant data files.
Users also have access to the built-in commands.
When users log into the system, they first need to build a project file and load the preprocessed data D shown in Data Dialog Box, and then choose mining algorithm, i.e.
IdeaGraph, and set parameters, see Fig 8.
At last, data D is visualized as a scenario map displayed in Graph Viewer.
Galaxy can generate directed map as well as undirected map using IdeaGraph algorithm.
Fig 9 shows a directed scenario map using IdeaGaph algorithm.
Users may rearrange node layout through moving the position of each node in the map.
When a user clicks on a node, the detailed information of it, such as title, content, picture, etc., is displayed in Metadata Display.
Parameter settings of IdeaGraph in Galaxy system Fig 8.
Parameter settings of IdeaGraph in Galaxy system.
A directed scenario map using IdeaGraph in Galaxy Fig 9.
A directed scenario map using IdeaGraph in Galaxy.
IdeaGraph scenario map is provided to user groups for collective intelligence and new data is obtained.
Then Galaxy assists users to make data synthesis and synthesized data Syn_ is mined again by IdeaGraph algorithm with the same parameter settings.
Eventually Galaxy will automatically track the dynamic changes of nodes and links in post and pre scenario map, reported in Dynamic Discovery, see Fig 10.
Data synthesis and dynamic discovery using Galaxy system Fig 10.
Data synthesis and dynamic discovery using Galaxy system.
We have successfully carried out a project in a famous auto company.
The objective of the project is to explore Chinese users’ preference on human–machine interface (HMI) system for further development.
HMI system may aid users’ simple access to all infotainment components, such as navigation, telephone, video/audio, entertainment information, etc.
To improve user experience while driving, the company is eager to discover more potential business opportunities which help to create new ideas and strategies on new products or services.
We provide idea discovery systematic approach to achieve the goal of the company.
Our main tasks are as below: 1.
Analyzing current HMI situation in automotive industry.
IdeaGraph is employed to mine and visualize the data from market investigation.
Identifying Chinese users preference on car HMI system.
iChance, a creativity support system is applied by the company to explore and understand potential demands of customers.
Achieving more actionable ideas and strategies for further product development.
The static discovery and dynamic discovery of idea discovery will help the company develop more actionable functions and strategies.
Implementation procedure The procedure of project implementation is presented as follows: Step 1: According to the project objective, we select relevant data
The data is preprocessed into 650 basket data sets where each item represents a specific function of HMI.
We also obtain valuable data through a group brainstorming and eventually collect 733 basket sets and visualize them into an IdeaGraph scenario map shown in Fig 11.
IdeaGraph scenario map visualized by Galaxy with 733 basket data sets Fig 11.
IdeaGraph scenario map visualized by Galaxy with 733 basket data sets.
Step 2: IdeaGraph scenario map is employed by iChance system for the company to make collaborative innovation with their customers on the Web (Wang & Ohsawa, 2011, 2012a).
Five customers are invited to join in iChance, and one Facilitator, two Experts, two Designers from the company participate in iChance as well.
Step 3: We take the new data obtained from Step 2 to make data synthesis using Galaxy, generating a new data source of 1091 basket data sets.
We visualize this new data source into a new scenario map shown in Fig 12 and compare current map with previous one.
Five group members of the company are required to observe dynamic changes of nodes and links and propose new ideas and strategies.
IdeaGraph scenario map after data synthesis Fig 12.
IdeaGraph scenario map after data synthesis.
The results of static and dynamic discovery 6.2.1.
Static discovery for creative ideas creation In the end, the company obtained ten product ideas from IdeaGraph scenario map.
Nine of ten product ideas are accepted by the company for further development.
The acceptance rate of ideas is up to 90 percent.
Moreover, these product ideas are clearly described for further product design.
Dynamic discovery from creative ideas to strategies Five group members in the company firstly is required to understand the new scenario map shown in Fig 12.
Dynamic changes of sub-scenarios.
As Fig 13 shows, comparing with the previous scenario map, the new scenario map has three additional sub-scenarios regarded as potential business opportunities in the future: (N1) Simplified Structure, (N2) Personalization and (N3) Intelligence Search.
Dynamic changes of sub-scenarios Fig 13.
Dynamic changes of sub-scenarios.
Dynamic changes of links/relations.
As Fig 14 shows, four nodes that have more links with the other nodes are chosen to observe dynamic changes of links/relations: Exact Match Search, Address Input, Interactive Mode and 3G/4G Wireless.
Finally, another four ideas are further proposed.
Dynamic changes of links/relations between event nodes Fig 14.
Dynamic changes of links/relations between event nodes.
Dynamic changes of nodes/events.
Group members found Screen Display, Music Downloads and The Conflict of Driver and Font Passenger, these three nodes changing from high frequency to low frequency, which reveals they would be well solved by the ideas from static discovery.
And another eight nodes that have changed from low frequency to high frequency indicate that they are probably emerging as potential business opportunities in the future.
That is, 3D Display, Multi-Touch Screen, Interface Customerization, Car Phone System will be popular with car owners.
What’s more, group members found that they need change their design strategies to respond ever-changing customer demands and market opportunities.
According to the changed nodes, such as Artificial Intelligence, Voice Recognition Technology, Intelligence Input and 3G/4G Wireless, group members suddenly realize a new strategy that intelligence and interconnection will be the trend of HMI product design and development.
Traditional text-based discovery researches too much focus on exploring the facts through data analysis.
However, a new trend is to identify true human insights through data synthesis rather than data analysis.
In this paper, we examined a scenairo-based system approach called idea discovery for sustainable creativity support through human–computer and human–human interaction.
Unlike traditional text-based discovery methods, idea discovery mainly depends on uncovering latent and important information (events and their relations) and its dynamic changes for high-quality ideas creation, integration and evaluation.
We have developed an intelligence system called Galaxy to support idea discovery process.
A case study in an auto company has verified the effectiveness of proposed method and system.
We have helped the company achieve ten creative ideas, nine of which are accepted by the company for further development.
Moreover, dynamic discovery makes the enterprise discover additional creative ideas regarded as potential business opportunities and timely develop their new strategies to respond ever-changing customer demands and market opportunities.
This research contributes new knowledge in such fields as expert system, decision support system, chance discovery, knowledge discovery, data synthesis, etc.
1 For interpretation of colour in Figs.
1 and 7, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.