Neural network modeling of sorption of pharmaceuticals in engineered floodplain filtration system

Abstract

Engineered floodplain filtration (EFF) system is a versatile low-cost water treatment process wherein water contaminants are removed, mainly by adsorption and–or degraded by microorganisms, as the infiltrating water moves from the wastewater treatment plants to any natural water stream. An artificial neural network (ANN) based on multilayer perceptrons with back propagation algorithm was used to approximate and interpret the complex input/output relationship, essentially to understand the breakthrough times in EFF system. Triclosan and ibuprofen were selected as the two model pollutants in this study owing to their environmental significance. The input parameters to the ANN model were inlet concentration (ppm) and flow rate (m/d), and the output parameters were six concentration-time pairs (C, t). These C, t pairs were the times in the breakthrough profile, when 1%, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% of the pollutant was present at the outlet of the system. The 10 set of experimental data points, 5 for each pollutant, statistically investigated in the continuous column studies using the full-factorial design, were divided into training (8 × 8) and testing (2 × 8) set. The most dependable condition for the network was selected by a trial and error approach and by estimating the determination coefficient (R2) value (>0.99) achieved during prediction of the testing set. The proposed ANN model for EFF system operation could be used as a potential alternative for knowledge-based models through proper training and testing of variables.

Keywords
Sorption
Triclosan
Ibuprofen
Activated carbon
EFF system
Artificial neural networks

1. Introduction

In the last several decades, the production of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) has increased rapidly due to the steadfast consumption by both humans and animals. A significant amount of these PPCPs discharged into the aquatic environment have been reportedly detected in wastewater and surface water at ppb to ppm levels (Kim, Cho, Kim, Vanderford, & Snyder, 2007; Pedrouzo, Reverté, Borrull, Pocurull, & Marcé, 2007; Vanderford, Pearson, Rexing, & Snyder, 2003). Furthermore, PPCPs have shown to pose severe risks and side-effects to the aquatic ecosystem owing to their inherent biological effects (Clara et al., 2005; Kasprzyk-Hordern, Dinsdale, & Guwy, 2008; Nakada et al., 2007; Sanderson et al., 2004). Collectively, pollution of the aquatic ecosystem by PPCPs is becoming an emerging unmanageable environmental problem worldwide.

The conventional treatment practices in wastewater treatment plants by and large do not effectively eliminate and/or degrade all the PPCPs. Ozonolysis and advanced oxidation techniques have shown to remove higher amount of PPCPs, but these tertiary treatment systems can easily increase the costs several-fold (Ternes et al., 2003). The partially eliminated as well as the residual quantities of PPCPs emerging from secondary treatment systems usually tend to accumulate in the aquatic environment (Hernando, Mezcua, Fernández-Alba, & Barceló, 2006). In this context, for waters already treated to primary and secondary levels, land treatment systems could be considered as a promising low-cost, eco-friendly alternative. One such land treatment system is the floodplain filtration (FPF) system (Fig. 1). FPF is a low-cost water treatment technology that has shown to be efficient in eliminating organics and nutrients from secondarily treated wastewater (Kunjikutty, 2006). Simultaneously, natural attenuation of emerging pollutants including PPCPs discharged in the secondarily treated wastewater effluents cannot also be ruled out during their infiltration and subsequent emergence in the rivers. The degree of PPCP elimination in FPF depends strongly on the proportion of clay, which has the ability to sorb the PPCPs in their matrix, present in the FPF and this value is typically ⩽2% (Jeong et al., 2003; Kunjikutty, Prasher, Patel, Barrington, & Kim, 2007). The removal of PPCPs from secondarily treated wastewater can be enhanced if the floodplains available nearby wastewater treatment facilities are supplemented with adequate proportions of a suitable sorbent. This retro-fitted engineered system, hereafter referred as engineered floodplain filtration (EFF), can also easily exploit the prevailing natural conditions leading to better performance at a low-cost. EFF is thus a modified slow sand filter with a layer of sorbent sandwiched between two sand layers. The EFF system can also be modified to act as a bio-barrier in order to remove or degrade the PPCPs by combining the adsorption and biodegradation steps within the same system.
Schematic of floodplain filtration system (MWWTF: municipal wastewater…

    

Fig. 1. Schematic of floodplain filtration system (MWWTF: municipal wastewater treatment facility).

Modeling of PPCP sorption behavior in environmental matrices is especially very complex. To avoid excessive testing times and experimental work expenses, numerous predictive mathematical models describing the adsorption behavior have been proposed. Mathematical models enable the prediction of breakthrough curve from the basic kinetic and equilibrium data and these models vary from linear and analytical ones to numerically based models that can only be solved with the help of supercomputers. Recently, the application of artificial neural networks (ANNs) in hydrology and water-resource related problems have been gaining tremendous momentum, as it has provided promising results for many non-linear and complex systems. ANNs are non-linear mathematical models capable of learning the arbitrary and complex physico-chemical process of a system from observed input variables and desired outputs of the system. The primary advantage of ANN over phenomenological/conceptual models is that, it does not require information about the complex nature of the underlying process to be explicitly described in mathematical form (Sahoo et al., 2005).

In this study, column experiments were carried out in lab-scale EFF systems, at different inlet concentration and flow rates of two PPCP model compounds; namely triclosan and ibuprofen (Table 1). Based on the collected experimental data, an ANN model was developed. The input parameters for the ANN model were inlet concentration and flow rate, while the output parameter was the times corresponding to the six concentration levels (T1, T5, T25, T50, T75 and T95) obtained at C/Co (exit concentration of the pollutant/inlet concentration of the pollutant) values of 1%, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95%, respectively.

Table 1. Structures and properties of triclosan and ibuprofen.a
Name	Molecular structure	MW	Log Kow	pKa	Water solubility (ppm)	Application
Triclosan		289.5	4.76	8.14	10	Anti-septic

Ibuprofen		206.3	3.97	4.91	21	Anti-inflammatory

a

    Adapted fromTrenholm, Vanderford, Holady, Rexing, and Snyder (2006).

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Floodplain sediment and activated carbon

The sediment used in this experiment was collected from the top 100 cm layer of an active floodplain, located upstream of Taehwa River in Ulsan, South Korea. Particle separate characteristics of sand, silt, and clay in the sediment were 91%, 8.9%, and 0.1%, respectively, while the physicochemical properties of the sediment such as pH, organic matter content, and cation exchange capacity were 6.95, 0.8%, and 1.1 cmol/kg, respectively. Activated carbon in granular form (particle size – 1.5 mm) was washed and dried at 105 °C overnight and stored in a desiccator until use.
2.2. Chemical preparation

Triclosan (⩾97%) was obtained from Fluka (Steinheim, Germany) and ibuprofen (99%) was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA. The physico-chemical properties of these two compounds are given in Table 1. The stock solutions of 1 g/L were prepared by dissolving the compounds in HPLC grade methanol (SK Chemical, Ulsan, South Korea) and stored at 4 °C. The stock solution was spiked with ultra-pure water to achieve the concentration levels of interest. All chemicals were used without further purification.
2.3. Column experiment

Columns made up of borosilicate glass having the following dimensions were used: 30 cm length × 6.5 cm diameter (ID) (Fig. 2). The conditions of the column experiments are based on the experimental design specified by 2k-full factorial design (Table 2) (Montgomery, 1991). To separately estimate the sorption capacity of the EFF system, six columns each with the 6th column acting as a replicate of the center-point condition (based on the full-factorial design) was used under abiotic conditions. To ensure abiotic condition, the floodplain sediment was sterilized at 100 °C for 1 h and 100 ppm of sodium azide (NaN3) was added to the contaminated solution prepared by spiking desired compounds in deionized water. The pH of that solution was maintained at ∼7. The columns were filled with floodplain sediment, sandwiching a 1 cm layer (16 g) of activated carbon (as adsorbent), placed 14 cm from the top of the column. Some glass wool and acid washed sand were put at the bottom of the columns to hold the floodplain sediment and activated carbon in place and to prevent leaching of sediment particles. All the columns were pre-wetted with double distilled water from the bottom to prevent the formation of air bubbles and to reduce the risk of channeling and then left to equilibrate for 2 d. Experiments were performed at ambient room temperatures (∼20 °C) and the entire unit used for column experiments, including the tanks, was protected against exposure to light.
Experimental set-up of the EFF column

    

Fig. 2. Experimental set-up of the EFF column.
(Adapted fromBehera (2010)).

Table 2. Experimental condition used in this study (based on the full-factorial design).
Run no.	Concentration (ppm)	Flow rate (m/d)
1	0.1	1
2	1	1
3	0.1	5
4	1	5
5	0.55	3
6	0.55	3
2.4. Chemical analysis

An HPLC system (Ultimate® 3000) (Dionex, Sunnyville, CA, USA) equipped with Acclaim® C-18 (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm) and Discovery RP-Amide C-16 (4.6 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm) columns were used to measure the triclosan and ibuprofen concentrations, respectively. The UV–vis detection wavelengths were 220 and 230 nm, respectively for triclosan and ibuprofen. The mobile phase used for elution was deionized water (30%) and acetonitrile (70%) for triclosan and 25 mM KH2PO4 at pH 3.0 (40%) and acetonitrile (60%) for ibuprofen, delivered at 1 mL/min through the columns. A sample injection volume of 100 μL was used. The column temperatures were maintained at 25 °C and 30 °C for triclosan and ibuprofen, respectively.
2.5. ANN modeling

ANNs consists of a system of simple interconnected processing element called neurons. This gives the ability to model any non-linear process through a set of unidirectional weighted connections. The neuron accepts input from single or multiple sources and produces output by a simple calculating process guarded by a non-linear transfer function. A simple three-layered network with an input layer, hidden layer and output layer is shown in Fig. 3. The input layer consists of a set of neurons NI, each representing an input parameter and propagates the raw information to the neuron in the hidden layer (NH), which in turn transmits them, to the neurons in the output layer (NO). Each layer consists of several neurons and the layers are connected by the connection weights (
and ). The most commonly used transfer function is the sigmoid function as described by
(1)
This produces output in the range of 0–1 and introduces non-linearity into the network, which gives the power to capture non-linear relationships. The back propagation network is the most prevalent supervised ANN learning model (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986). It uses the gradient descent algorithm to correct the weights between interconnected neurons (Maier & Dandy, 2001). During the learning process of the network, the algorithm computes the error between the predicted and specified target values at the output layer. The error function at the output layer can be defined by
(2)

where E is the global error function, Od and Op are the desired output and predicted output by the network, respectively.
Topology of an ANN model

    

Fig. 3. Topology of an ANN model.
2.5.1. Data pre-processing and division

The data points from all the EFF systems, operated at initial concentrations of 0.1, 0.55 and 1 ppm were normalized and scaled (Eq. (3)) to the range of 0–1, so as to suit the transfer function in the hidden (sigmoid) and output layer (linear). More comprehensible and relevant information on the different types of transfer function, algorithms and internal parameter used for developing ANN models are given elsewhere (Haykin, 1994; Hoskins & Himmelblau, 1988)
(3)
where

is the normalized value, Xmin and Xmax are the minimum and maximum values of X, respectively. This processed data was later divided into two sets; training and testing. 80% (8) of the data points were used for training the network, while 20% (2) were used for testing the developed network.
2.5.2. Model-inputs and outputs

The input vectors to the network were the easily monitored parameters namely; input concentration (X1) and flow rate (X2). The output of the ANN model was the times (day) corresponding to the six concentration levels. The six concentration levels considered are those corresponding to the non-dimensional parameter (C/Co) values of 1%, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95%. These outputs are denoted as T1, T5, T25, T50, T75 and T95, respectively. Concentrations below C = 0.01Co and the concentrations of C = Co are practically difficult to detect. The six-point method proposed here is assumed to be sufficient to sketch an approximate, yet a close enough breakthrough curve. Besides, breakpoints at 1% and 5% are commonly used in water and wastewater treatment applications.
2.5.3. Internal network parameters

A good network architecture requires proper selection of sensitive parameters like: number of hidden layers, the number of neurons in the hidden layer (NH), the activation function f(x), the learning rate of the network (η), epoch size (ε), momentum term (α) and training cycles (TC). The network architecture has to be optimized to reduce computer processing, achieve good predictability and avoid over fitting. The learning rate (η) and momentum (α) can play an important role in the convergence of the network. The η value of a network affects the size of steps taken in weight space. If η is too small, the algorithm would take more time to converge. The momentum term (α) accelerates the convergence of the error during the learning process by adding a fraction to the precious weight update. The values of η and α varies between 0 and 1 and is normally estimated by trial and error. Initially, network training based on a trial and error approach was used to identify the best suitable range of these parameters. A detailed study on the effect of internal network parameter on the performance of back propagation neural network (BPNN) and the procedure involved in selecting the best network topology has been described elsewhere (Maier & Dandy, 1998).
2.5.4. Selecting the best model architecture

The performance of the training and test data set were evaluated in terms of the correlation coefficient values (R2), which substantially determines the closeness of prediction between the desired and predicted output from the network. This is given by:
(4)

where X is the experimental value, Y is the model predicted value, and N is the total number of observations. Furthermore, for the testing data set, the total mean squared error (RMSE) was computed according to the formulae given elsewhere (Elias, Berastegi, Arias, & Barona, 2006).
2.5.5. Software used

ANN based predictive modeling was carried out using the shareware version of the neural network and multivariable statistical modeling software NNMODEL (version 1.4, neural fusion, NY). The same software was also used to carry out the sensitivity analysis.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Column studies

Continuous tests were carried out under abiotic conditions at three different initial concentrations and flow-rates (Table 2). The inlet and outlet concentrations of both triclosan and ibuprofen were measured every day, and the results were interpreted in terms of the trend of C/Co, to achieve breakthrough. The time course C/Co profile of triclosan and ibuprofen, at all the tested conditions is illustrated in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. It can be observed clearly that, the onset of breakthrough condition differed depending on the initial setting of flow rate (Q) and initial concentration (Co), for both the compounds. It is also evident that the breakthrough time in both cases decreased with an increase of Co and Q. At lower Co and Q, breakthrough occurred slower and vice versa. These results demonstrate that the change of concentration and flow rate affects the saturation rate of sorbent and breakthrough time, which are the typical characteristics of any adsorption process. With the increase of Co and Q, the loading rate of the selected pharmaceuticals increased, and consequently the fixed-bed EFF column became saturated with the pharmaceutical concentration as the effluent approached the Co. For both triclosan and ibuprofen, high flow rate and high concentration (5 m/d and 1 ppm) favored this phenomenon.
Breakthrough curves; triclosan (a) and ibuprofen (b)

    

Fig. 4. Breakthrough curves; triclosan (a) and ibuprofen (b).

The breakthrough curves shifted to the origin at same Co (0.1 and 1 ppm) with increasing Q, and earlier breakthrough time was observed for the higher flow rate. In the interval of 70 d, the value of C/Co for triclosan reached 0.51 and 0.85 at Co of 0.1 ppm and flow rates 1 m/d and 5 m/d, respectively (Fig. 4a). Similarly, in the same interval of time and at the same Co, the value of C/Co for ibuprofen reached 0.43 and 0.99 when flow rates were 1 m/d and 5 m/d, respectively (Fig. 4b). Similar phenomena were also observed at higher Co (1 ppm) and at different flow rates (1 m/d and 5 m/d). For example, the values of C/Co reached at Co of 1 ppm and flow rates 1 m/d and 5 m/d were 0.33, and 0.79 and 0.16, and 0.98, respectively for triclosan and ibuprofen.

The variation in the adsorption capacity at various Co and Q can be explained on the basis of mass transfer fundamentals. The breakthrough time at Q = 1 m/d is longer than that at Q = 5 m/d because it takes a longer time to reach its effective bed load when the other operating conditions are held at their respective constant values. Therefore, as Q increases, the breakthrough curve becomes steeper, because of the shorter time required to attain its effective bed load. In other words, increasing Q decreases the effective bed load or the effective adsorption capacity of the EFF column. This phenomenon is usually expected because the effective bed load reduces with increasing Q and hence requires a shorter time for breakthrough of bed (Ruthven, 1984).

On the other hand, a close examination of Figs. 4a and b reveals that at the same Q, the value of breakthrough time decreased with an increase in Co values. The larger the Co, the steeper the slope of the breakthrough curve and smaller the breakthrough time. At low Co, breakthrough curves were dispersed and breakthrough occurred slower. As the value of Co increased, sharper breakthrough curves were obtained. This can be explained by the fact that more adsorption sites were covered with increase in Co. These results demonstrated that the change in concentration gradient affected both the saturation rate and breakthrough time (Knaebel, Ruthven, Humphrey, & Carr, 1999). As Co increased, the loading rate of triclosan and ibuprofen increased, so does the driving force or mass transfer, which results in a decrease in the adsorption zone length. This result is in agreement with the works reported previously on various fixed-bed adsorption systems, where a wide variety of environmental chemicals were tested (Ahmad & Hameed, 2010; Lua & Jia, 2009; Singh, Srivastava, & Mall, 2009).
3.2. ANN modeling
3.2.1. Data analysis and best network topology

The experimental data were divided into training (NTr-80%) and test data (NTe-20%), leaving behind the steady-state data of C/Co, after noticing breakthrough. The output variables, i.e., T1–T95, was chosen based on a previous adsorption/predictive modeling study using neural networks reported in the literature (Basheer & Najjar, 1996). The basic statistics of the variables for the training matrix are shown in Table 3. This table forms the database of the training sets that embody a certain pattern and that the present neural network has to be trained on to capture that pattern.

Table 3. Basic statistics of training data.
Variable	N	Mean	Std. dev.	Minimum	Maximum	Sum sq.
C	8	0.55	0.48107	0.1	1	4.4
Q	8	3	2.13809	1	5	24
T1	8	29.875	18.31812	10	55	239
T5	8	34.375	19.84179	11	57	275
T25	8	45	15.63878	26	66	360
T50	8	51.125	15.06593	32	71	409
T75	8	57.375	14.39184	40	76	459
T95	8	61.875	15.30114	43	79	495

Note: C: influent concentration (ppm), Q: flow rate (m/d), T1–T95: times corresponding to C/C0 (1–95%), respectively.

The number of neurons in the input layer (NI = 2) and output layer (N0 = 6) were chosen based on the number of input and output variables to the network. However, in order to get the best/optimum network parameters, in most instances, literature suggests the use of a trial and error approach where the performance goal is set by the user. The best network architecture (Table 4) was chosen based on the maximum predictability of the network for the test data by analyzing the correlation coefficient values (R2). The model was trained using different combinations of these network parameters, viz., learning rate, momentum term and number of neurons in the hidden layer, so as to achieve maximum correlation coefficient values (target value = 1, i.e., 100% correlation between measured and predicted variables). This was achieved by a vigorous trial and error approach by keeping some training parameters constant and by slowly moving the other parameters over a wide range of values. Increasing the number of neurons from 2 to 4 in the hidden layer (NH), increased the R2 value, while values larger than 4 did not show any improvement in the predictive ability of the developed model. Due to the high R2 observed under this particular setting of network parameters (R2 > 0.95), this value of NH was kept constant at 4. Thus, by keeping the number of neurons in the hidden layer constant, the values of both learning rate and momentum term was slowly changed from 0.1 to 0.95, through a series of trial and errors, and by observing the changes of R2 in the training data set. It was observed that, lower values of these parameters decreased the R2, from 0.98 to 0.87, while higher values showed maximum predictive potential for the developed model. Thus these values were then set at 0.9 and 0.8, respectively. The R2 values achieved during training and testing are shown in Table 5.

Table 4. Best values of network parameters used for training the network.
Training parameters	Value
Training count (iterations)	20,000
Number of neurons in input layer	2
Number of neurons in hidden layer	4
Number of neurons in output layer	6
Learning rate	0.9
Momentum term	0.8
Error tolerance	0.00001
Training algorithm	Gradient descent algorithm
Number of training data set	8
Number of test data set	2

Table 5. Coefficient of regression (R2) values obtained during training and testing.
	Triclosan	Ibuprofen
	Run-1	Run-2	Run-3	Run-4	Run-1	Run-2	Run-3	Run-4
Training	0.999	0.989	0.994	0.999	0.999	0.984	0.993	0.999
Testing	0.967	0.993
3.2.2. Predictive capability of the developed model

From Figs. 5 and 6, it can be seen that some data points show deviancy between the measured and predicted C/Co profiles. This is probably due to the fact that different conditions exhibited different onset times for reaching breakthrough. The delay in achieving breakthrough, i.e., at low flow rates and concentrations would have caused an impact in the neural networks learning/generalization pattern while predicting the performance parameter. The corresponding connection weights and bias terms for the developed network are presented in Table 6. As observed in Fig. 5, the neural network predicted breakthrough curves are very close to the corresponding exact ones. Although the developed neural network is specific, more general networks using wider ranges and variety of input parameters can be developed using the procedure adopted in this work.
Training data for triclosan (a) and ibuprofen (b) (Run 1–4/p: model predicted;…

    

Fig. 5. Training data for triclosan (a) and ibuprofen (b) (Run 1–4/p: model predicted; Run 1–4/e: experimentally observed).
Testing data for triclosan and ibuprofen

    

Fig. 6. Testing data for triclosan and ibuprofen.

Table 6. Hidden layer connection weights and bias term after network training.
Variable	HID001	HID002	HID003	HID004		
Input to hidden layer weights
C	2.016	−4.799	−4.1	3.18		
Q	2.786	−4.087	0.329	−9.127		
Bias	−1.296	1.617	−0.147	2.62		
	T1	T5	T25	T50	T75	T95
Hidden to output layer weights
HID001	−1.556	−0.946	−0.441	−0.638	−0.598	−0.382
HID002	4.297	2.768	2.718	1.937	1.389	0.836
HID003	−1.302	0.172	0.326	0.815	1.161	1.562
HID004	0.901	1.5	0.922	0.865	0.924	1.211
Bias	0.731	0.108	0.147	0.414	0.429	0.213

Note. C: influent concentration (ppm), Q: flow rate (m/d), T1–T95: times corresponding to C/C0 (1–95%), respectively.

The application of the BPNN to predict the filtrate water quality parameters; temperature, turbidity, heterotrophic bacteria, and coliform removal have been studied using riverbank filtration facilities, wherein optimization of the ANN models’ structure was performed on a trial and error basis. It was observed that the BPNN model prediction result produced excellent agreement with the measured data at a very high correlation coefficient (>0.99) in all the cases (Sahoo et al., 2005). Experimental breakthrough curves of pesticide in surface water were assessed in fixed-beds and modeled using neural network approaches. Fifteen potentially influential parameters were identified in that study for the dynamic adsorption of pesticides from surface water. For all breakthrough curves, computations were performed for specific zones of the breakthrough curves; breakthrough zone (C/C0 < 0.10), saturation zone (C/C0 > 0.9), and the global breakthrough curve (0 < C/C0 < 1). Neural networks provide quite satisfactory predictions for pesticide dynamic adsorption onto activated carbon with R2 larger than 0.981 (Faur, Cougnaud, Dreyfus, & Le Cloirec, 2008). ANN-based models were also developed to predict the performance of moving bed biofilm reactor for the treatment of a toxic and highly refractory aromatic amine compound, aniline. For experiments conducted over a period of 3 months, the reactor performance efficiency was predicted at different retention times of 8, 24, 48 and 72 h, respectively with influent COD ranging from 100 to 4000 ppm. The proposed ANN model demonstrated the ability of BPNN to predict the performance of moving bed biofilm reactor with sufficient accuracy (Delnavaz, Ayati, & Ganjidoust, 2010). For determining adsorption capability of two textile dyes in a fixed-bed system, packed with a tree bark as adsorbent, ANN model has been developed with bed depth, influent dye concentration and volume of wastewater as the input parameters. The breakthrough curves of adsorption were also exhibited by this model, which was found to describe the system well. It was observed that with increase of bed height and decrease of influent dye concentration, the breakthrough time was delayed. In that study, the authors showed that neural networks can be used as an effective technique to model, estimate state variables and predict the absorption behavior with satisfactory results (Balci, Keskinkan, & Avci, 2010). Similarly, Oguz and Ersoy (2010) conducted continuous flow experiments in fixed-bed adsorption columns to remove Cu2+ ions from aqueous solution using sunflower shells as adsorbent. They investigated the effects of flow rate, inlet concentration, pH, bed depth and particle size on the breakthrough characteristics of the adsorption system and subsequently developed an ANN model to predict the Cu2+ concentration removed from aqueous solution as a function of empirical parameters. The relationship between the predicted and observed data of the model yielded in a correlation coefficient of 0.986. On the other hand, ANN models have also been proposed to predict the performance of a continuously operating immobilized-cell biofilter treating NH3 vapors. The input parameters to the ANN model were inlet concentration, loading rate, flow rate and pressure drop, and the output parameters were removal efficiency and elimination capacity. The results showed that a multilayer network (4–4–2) with a BPNN was able to predict biofilter performance effectively with R2 values more than 0.98 (Rene, Kim, & Park, 2009).
3.2.3. Sensitivity analysis of the developed model

Sensitivity analysis is a useful technique to assess the relative contribution of the input variables to the performance of a neural network by testing the neural network when each input variable is unavailable. This is performed by varying the value of one parameter over a certain range and by observing the associated effect on the desired outcome. For the problem studied in this work, the two input parameters were checked for their sensitivity to the breakthrough curve. The four-hidden nodes network was used for this test. However, to avoid any bias, a representative set was selected by taking the average of each input parameter from the training and testing databases. The two parameters in the average set are Co = 0.55 ppm and Q = 3 m/d. The value of each of these two parameters is perturbed about its mean and the output breakthrough curve is determined using the predictive network. It is noteworthy to mention here that all perturbations were made within the limits of the applicability of each input parameter. The average absolute sensitivity matrix (Ski,abs) can be defined as follows:
(5)
where

is the sensitivity of the trained output and p is the number of training patterns presented to the network.

The higher average absolute sensitivity values (Table 7) for flow rate rather than concentration suggest that flow change has a significant and greater influence on the C/Co values than the initial concentrations of both triclosan and ibuprofen. In general, the predictive ability of the proposed model using the concepts of artificial intelligence and the back propagation algorithm was high at the 95% confidence interval and meaningfully significant, as ascertained from the correlation coefficient values between the measured and predicted outputs in the training and test data.

Table 7. Average absolute sensitivity values for the outputs.
Variable	T1	T5	T25	T50	T75	T95
Q	0.7586	0.7934	0.7368	0.7214	0.7186	0.7585
C	0.2414	0.2066	0.2632	0.2785	0.2814	0.2415

Note. Q: flow rate (m/d), C: concentration (ppm).
3.2.4. Practical implication

The behavior of the adsorption column (lysimeter) predicted by the ANN model can be compared by continuously monitoring the concentrations at the outlet. This can be done by acquiring the signal from a sensor coupled online to an auto-sampler connected to a HPLC system. Thus, based on the information from the sensor, and based on the training made previously, the breakthrough times of the column can be easily predicted. Consequently, the flow can be diverted to a fresh column while this previously used column can be regenerated separately. Furthermore, the column lysimeter data can also be used to predict the performance of EFF system in real-time applications. For example, Nema, Chelani, Ojha, Kumar, and Khanna (2004) have shown that the ANN predicted results of their column lysimeter experiment was in perfect agreement with observed field data from their pilot soil aquifer treatment system and indicated the utility of column lysimeter studies in evaluating soil aquifer treatment systems. However, since the study period was only about 3 months resulting in limited data collection, further studies along similar lines over longer periods would add a further degree of confidence in the translation of column lysimeter results to the actual full-scale EFF system. Anew, in order to extrapolate the results obtained in this modeling work from lab-scale experiments to practical situations, it is always possible to introduce new inputs and new values to the already existing database and the network can be trained whenever required. Apart from this flexibility in updating the model as and when required, ANNs also provide sufficient information to the plant operator about all possible interactions between predictor variables (T1–T95) and can also signal/alarm the operator if unusual deviations in values are noticed.
4. Conclusions

The following conclusions were made based on the performance modeling of the EFF systems using neural networks:

1.

    The results from this ANN-based data-driven modeling strategy shows that the EFF system performance, in terms of C/Co values, can be predicted with high confidence level (95%) using easily measurable operational parameters, namely, inlet concentration and flow rate. The model was adequately trained with the laboratory-scale EFF column data and tested with a separate data set.
2.

    A three-layered MLP was sufficient to describe the breakthrough using connection weights and bias terms (thresholds). The suitable network architecture of the model was determined through a vigorous trial and error approach. The computed determination coefficient (R2) values for the test data set show high correlation between the predicted and measured performance values. The best topology was found to be a simple three-layered network, 2–4–6, achieved at the following settings of internal network parameters: learning rate (0.9), momentum (0.8) and a training count (epoch size) of 20,000.
3.

    From a practical application view point, if the pollutants and their concentration are known in the inlet stream, they can be added to the network and can be trained easily. Consequently, the time for removing 1%, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 95% of the target pollutants in the EFF by adsorption can be evaluated, which indicates the versatility of the model.
4.

    The robustness of the ANN was further explored with a sensitivity analysis of the input parameters, which showed that flow rate was a more critical factor affecting EFF system performance, than the inlet concentrations of triclosan and ibuprofen.
5.

    The models developed in this study can be extended to biotic conditions by incorporating some easily measurable state parameters such as oxygen utilization rate and specific activity of the microorganisms to predict the breakthrough in a long term assessment.
6.

    Although ANN models are not a substitute for a mechanistic model, they were found to be promising for real-time use, in predicting the breakthrough characteristics at different process conditions.