An artificial intelligence-based approach to deal with argumentation applied to food quality in a public health policy

Abstract

Argumentation is a relatively new research area in Artificial Intelligence. Since the early 1980s, its use has been investigated in various frameworks. We propose a general model for recommendation-based argumentation by extending Dung’s seminal argumentation system. This approach is applied to analyse argumentation on food quality in a public health policy. Cereal products, and more specifically bread, are used by decision makers as a healthy lever to fight against diseases such as obesity or diabetes. Our model outputs new recommendations based on stakeholder’s argumentation by targeting some specific audiences.

Keywords
Artificial intelligence
Argumentation
Decision support
Arbitration
Benefit-risk analysis
Preferences
Knowledge representation
Case study
Nutrition

1. Introduction

Food quality assessment is a highly complex procedure since it relies on numerous criteria which are classically grouped into four main types of characteristics: nutritional, sensorial, service or practicity and sanitary quality. These can be supplemented by other emerging concerns such as environmental quality, economic quality, etc. However, all of these aspects of quality and their various components are not always compatible and their simultaneous improvement is a problem that has no simple solution.

Thus the consumption of whole wheat cereal products, although beneficial from a nutritional point of view due to the micro-nutrients and the fibers they provide, raises the question of the risk of contamination, by pesticides and other contaminants. By choosing organic products or trusting regulations, can one sacrifice everything for safety and health with the risk of under-evaluating sensorial pleasure? This is a dilemma for consumers, but it also concerns agri-food chain stakeholders and decision makers.

A tradeoff between nutritional, organoleptic and sanitary quality has been built in an empirical way within agri-food chains, with progressive control of transformation processes. With the emergence of new concerns and requests, it is now necessary to re-position this tradeoff within a new balance, which especially gives greater importance to nutritional aspects. Public health programs, such as the PNNS (Programme National Nutrition Santé) which started in France in 2001, strives to cope with increasingly common diseases in Western societies (cardiovascular diseases, cancers, obesity, etc.). Consumers are becoming more receptive to these new problems and new tools are needed to meet emerging needs by adapting, innovating, optimizing decision schemes within agri-food chains.

The importance attached to the different involved criteria varies among several stakeholders. Thus the experts may evaluate a risk level due to a contaminant as perfectly acceptable in comparison with the benefit it provides (e.g. for a phytosanitary product) or in comparison to the cost of additional precautions which may not be very efficient (e.g. for mycotoxins), whereas consumers may not accept an even low food risk. The underlying scientific questioning is as follows:

•

    What kind of representation model is suitable for taking these contradictory points of view into account?
•

    How can the priorities of the different involved stakeholders and the relative importance they attach to the considered criteria be taken into account?
•

    Can there be different audiences representative of consumer segments?
•

    How can the raised conflicts be solved so as to achieve a tradeoff within an automated decision-making aid system?

This paper proposes an artificial intelligence-based approach to allow the formalization of available knowledge as elements for decision-making, including “implicit” expertise and not only analytical data which are more classically used, as well as decision-making through the development of a model that highlights and proposes solutions to conflicts between contradictory knowledge. The proposed approach is based on an argumentative decision system. Argumentative systems reflect how human argumentation uses conflicting information to construct and analyse arguments. They involve identifying arguments and counterarguments relevant to a given concern.

Within existing approaches, note that methods based on the comparison of risk functions, of numerical type, are not applicable here, since the project mainly relies on the formalization of highly qualitative implicit expert knowledge. Classical multi-criteria decision-making, based on the evaluation of several possible decision options on the basis of a set of criteria, is also unsuitable since it relies on the optimization of a set of objective criteria and does not allow for the representation of contradictory viewpoints and debate considerations. More precisions and syntheses on existing decision methods can be found, e.g. in Figueira, Greco, and Ehrgott (2005) and Bouyssou, Dubois, Pirlot, and Prade (2009).

At present, the closest approaches to decision-making in the presence of contradictory points of view are studies that deal with argumentative reasoning (Besnard & Hunter, 2008; Rahwan & Simari, 2009). Argumentative reasoning was first studied for its ability to understand situations where information are incoherent because they come from several sources or correspond to several points of view that possibly have different priority levels. It also appears to play an important part in decision tasks, where pros and cons have to be balanced on the basis of available knowledge. Decision and argumentation issues have been studied separately, with different objectives. Very few studies deal with the advantages of argumentative methods as explanation elements for decision support (Amgoud & Prade, 2009a), which is the question considered here.

The present paper proposes two contributions. Firstly, the paper presents an analysis of a case study concerning risk/benefit evaluation within the wheat to bread chain, according to recommendations for more whole-grain products given by the PNNS public health policy in France. Indeed, this recommendation has to cope with different viewpoints and strong reserves on behalf of the concerned wheat processing stakeholders. This case study relies on the analysis of various knowledge sources: scientific articles, technical documents, interviews, conferences and debates. Secondly, the paper proposes a formal and generic argumentation model for the representation and evaluation of such a case study, which is also suitable for other application domains. This model is a refinement and a practical application of the method presented by Bourguet, Amgoud, and Thomopoulos (2010).
2. Materials and methods

This section describes the successive steps used to run the proposed methodology: the identification of available information sources Section 2.1, the modeling of arguments Section 2.2 and the principle of argumentation systems Section 2.3.
2.1. Identification and analysis of information sources

Several kinds of information sources were used in this study. They include, from the most to the least formal ones:

1.

    scientific peer-reviewed articles;
2.

    technical reports or information published on websites;
3.

    scientific conferences and research project meetings;
4.

    expert knowledge obtained through interviews.

For the considered case study concerning the position of the bread chain regarding the PNNS recommendations, we used the following sources.

The scientific peer-reviewed articles we analyzed include Bourre et al. (2008), Slavin and Green (2007), Dubuisson-Quellier (2006) and Ginon, Lohérac, Martin, Combris, and Issanchou (2009). Bourre et al. (2008) compare different types of flours from a nutritional standpoint. Slavin and Green (2007) study the link between fibers and satiety. Dubuisson-Quellier (2006) and Ginon et al. (2009) deal with consumption behavior and consumers’ acceptance to pay, especially concerning French baguettes, when fiber information is provided, based on experimental and statistical studies of consumer panels.

We also analyzed several scientific conference proceedings, and examined numerous technical reports available on official websites concerning the PNNS public health policy (PNNS (statutory documents), 2005; PNNS, 2005), the Healthgrain European project concerning the improvement of nutrition and health benefits through cereal grains (Dean et al., 2007; HEALTHGRAIN, 2009), French projects and symposiums concerning sanitary, nutritional, sensorial and technological qualities of breads (AQUANUP, 2009; CADINNO, 2008; DINABIO, 2008; FCN, 2009).

Finally, several interviews were conducted to collect expert knowledge from domain specialists covering various aspects of the bread chain, from health and organoleptic concerns to millers’ and bakers’ technological or economic concerns.
2.2. Modeling available information into structured arguments

Starting from the above information sources, the modeling task is an iterative task where arguments are firstly collected from different stakeholders, formalized, then validated by experts from different fields.

From PNNS public health policy motivations, seminal purposes are first considered as “reasons” that justify arguments. The first step of argument modeling is thus to extract a reason (denoted Reason).

Case study. Reason extraction

“Considering nutrition as a determinant lever for health, one nutritional priority is to increase the daily consumption of carbohydrates, promoting the consumption of starch based food allowing to increase fiber intake.” From this sentence, the general reason of Table 1 can be extracted.

Table 1. Reason.
Reason
“Increasing the fiber content in the diet is relevant”

This general reason can be refined into more specific reasons that directly support actions. Consequently, in this case study, an argument is considered as a reason supporting a decision, a recommendation or more generally an action (denoted Action).

Case study cont. Supported action

“Bread is selected in this program as a food source for daily intake of fibers. Increasing the flour yield (↗ F.Y) results in a higher fiber content in the flour and consequently in the bread. For these reasons, PNNS consider the possibility of an evolution of common bread legislation in order to increase the fiber content in bread.” From these sentences, we extract a specific reason that supports an action, as shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Reason supports an action.
	Reason	Action
1	“The flour extraction rate is measured by the mineral content, fiber increase in correlation with this rate”	↗ F.Y
2.3. Existing argumentation models

Argumentation is a reasoning model based on the construction and evaluation of interacting arguments. It has been applied to nonmonotonic reasoning (e.g. Dung, 1995), decision making (e.g. Bonet & Geffner, 1996; Fox & Das, 2000), and for modeling different types of dialogues including negotiation (e.g. Kraus, Sycara, & Evenchik, 1998; Sycara, 1990). Thus, most of the models developed for the above applications are grounded on the abstract argumentation framework proposed in Dung (1995). In this model, an argument gives a reason for supporting a recommendation or for doing an action. To grasp real-world decision schemes, with regard to previous works (Amgoud & Prade (2009b)), we integrate a set of all possible recommendations1 supported by arguments within the original abstract decision framework. This yields the following framework:

Definition 1

An (argumentation-based) decision framework DF is a couple
, where:

•

    is a set of arguments,
•

    is a set of actions, supposed to be mutually exclusive,
•

    action: 

    is a function returning the action supported by an argument.

Classically, an argumentation process follows three main steps: (1) constructing arguments and counter-arguments, (2) evaluating the acceptability of the different arguments, and (3) concluding or defining the justified conclusions.

In Dung’s framework, to complete the first step, a binary relation on the set
called “defeat” is defined, reflecting conflicts among arguments. A Dung-style argumentation framework AF can be built as an equivalent framework to DF. The equivalence between these abstract frameworks is introduced in Bourguet, Amgoud, and Thomopoulos (2009). We can thus come back to a classical framework where arguments are conflicting when supported actions are distinct:

Definition 2

From an argumentation-based decision framework
, an equivalent argumentation framework is built where:

•

    is the same set of arguments,
•

    is a defeat relation such that (α, β) ∈ Def if action(α) ≠ action(β).

Case study cont. System representation

The arguments from Table 3 describe several reasons to support different changes in common bread legislation (increasing or decreasing the flour yield, resp. noted ↗ F.Y or ↘ F.Y). The directed graph representing these arguments and the defeat relation between them is shown in Fig. 1.

Table 3. Arguments with mutually exclusive actions.
	Reason	Action
1	“The flour extraction rate is measured by the mineral content, fiber increase in correlation with this rate”	↗ F.Y
2	“An increase in the flour extraction rate brings economic benefits”	↗ F.Y
3	“A decrease in the flour extraction rate brings better sensorial attributes”	↘ F.Y
4	“A decrease in the flour extraction rate brings sanitary improvements”	↘ F.Y
Directed graph of AF

    

Fig. 1. Directed graph of AF.

Dung’s acceptability semantics allow one to identify, among all the conflicting arguments, the ones that will be kept for determining acceptable options. An acceptability semantics amounts to defining sets of arguments that satisfy a consistency requirement and defend all their elements. The main semantics introduced by Dung are recalled in the following definition. Note that other semantics have been defined in the literature, see for instance Baroni, Giacomin, and Guida (2005). Before formally defining these notions, we introduce them briefly:

•

    A set of arguments is conflict-free if there is no defeat between its arguments.
•

    A set of arguments defends a defeated argument if the defeater is defeated by at less one argument from this set.
•

    Arguments from an admissible extension indicate argumentative coherence (conflict-free and defense).
•

    Several admissible extensions may exist; these sets are always included in at least one preferred extension which can be directly used for the decision-support system.

Definition 3

Let
be an argumentation framework, and let

•

is conflict-free if there are no

    such that (α, β) ∈ Def.
•

defends α if for all , if (β, α) ∈ Def, then there is

    such that (γ, β) ∈ Def.
•

is an admissible extension if is conflict-free and defends any element in

    .
•

is a preferred extension if

    is a maximal (w.r.t set inclusion) admissible set.

Naturally, the recommended decisions can be those supported by arguments from preferred extensions. From the decision framework, we propose to define a decisional output denoted out(DF), which returns a coherent set of decisions.

Definition 4

Let
be a decision framework and let AF be an equivalent argumentation framework. For any d if there is a preferred extension of AF with

such that α ∈ action−1(d).

Case study cont. Decision supported

In Fig. 1, each argument self-defends and the sets of arguments supporting the same option are conflict-free.

•

    There are two preferred extensions {1, 2} and {3, 4}.
•

    The decisional output of DF is the set out (DF) = {↗F.Y, ↘F.Y}.

As shown by the example just discussed, we may have several options and no way of retaining only one option. After Dung’s proposition, different extensions of this seminal framework have been proposed in the literature, where arguments are assumed to have different (contextual) strengths: (Amgoud & Cayrol, 2002; Amgoud, Parsons, & Perrussel, 2000), or different prioritized values: (Bench-Capon, 2003; Kaci & van der Torre, 2008). Therefore, the model can be further refined with preferences involving priorities between arguments. Thus, the arguments themselves will be refined using contextual data inherent to argumentation components (stakeholders, concerns, etc.). Finally, actions are not necessarily mutually exclusive: some actions may be more specialized than others. To summarize, the proposed model should take into account:

•

    Stakeholders and concerns (denoted Stakeh. and Concern(s));
•

    Goals (denoted Goal (s)) promoted by arguments, achieving positive effects (either a increase denoted ↗, or a decrease denoted ↘) on an unipolar scale;
•

    Specialized actions denoted “Action & Specialization” allowing to represent non-symmetric defeats.

This refined argument formalization is detailed in Section 3. Let us illustrate it by an argument put forward by PNNS and promoting an original nutritional objective.

Case study cont. Arguments refinement

In Table 4, an argument from PNNS gives a reason to support a saltless bread, action denoted “↗ F.Y & Saltless”, considered as a specialization of action ↗ F.Y. Thus, this argument defeats any argument supporting a strictly more general action (i.e., ↗ F.Y, ↘ F.Y, …). In the following, the notion of “attack” will be used to express the defeat concept in the presence of specialized actions. The attack relation is generally not symmetric: if an action a1 is more specific than action a2, then an argument supporting a1 attacks arguments supporting a2 but the reverse attack does not hold. On this basis, we propose to formalize the main arguments of breadchain stakeholders in response to global recommendations of the PNNS public health policy. Interactions between these arguments can be represented by Fig. 2 and computed within an argumentation framework in order to reach a recommendation that satisfies the most relevant points of view.

Table 4. A refined argument.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
0	PNNS	“Reducing the average intake of sodium chloride (salt) is relevant”	↗ F.Y & Saltless	Nutrition	↘ Salt
Directed graph with non-symmetric attacks

    

Fig. 2. Directed graph with non-symmetric attacks.
3. Results

The argumentation, in response to the PNNS recommendation for more complete cereal products, represents an analysis concerning a risk/benefit evaluation within the bread chain and is described in Section 3.2. A formal and generic argumentation model for the representation, the evaluation of arguments and the recommendation of actions are detailed in Section 3.3, while the results are summarized in Section 3.4. The global scheme of this approach is summarized in Section 3.1.
3.1. Global scheme

To use the proposed model, the following steps may be successively performed:

1.

    Obtain a representation of all arguments, with their associated stakeholders, criteria, objectives and actions. Attacks may be defined by specialization of actions or mutually exclusive actions.
2.

    Define audiences, i.e., publics targeted by the arguments, e.g. consumers or specific kinds of consumers. Audiences lead to prioritize goals on different concerns. In the following, this goal prioritization is used to represent an audience.
3.

    Generate preference relations between arguments for each audience, according to these prioritizations.
4.

    Define the defeat relation between arguments.
5.

    Compute the decisional resolution which leads to recommending one or several actions.

3.2. Arguments

PNNS aims at improving public health by acting on one of its major factors: nutrition, including the following concrete components:

•

    improving the nutritional quality of bread, by developing the consumption of breads made with more whole wheat flour, such as 80-type flour, instead of the 65-type currently used (i.e., containing 0.80 g of minerals per 100 g of flour on a dry basis, instead of 0.65 g per 100 g);
•

    concluding engagement charts with professional chains (bakers and millers), catering societies, etc.

Two mutually exclusive alternatives can be pointed out: change to 80-type flour (action denoted ↷ T80) or keep 65-type flour (action denoted ⥀ T65) for common bread. In Table 5, we list the arguments from public policy (Stakeh. = PNNS), which take different concerns (Concern(s) = Nutrition, Technology, Economy) into account, promote several goals (Goal (s) = ↗ Fibers, ↗ Micronutrients, ↘ Process Skills, ↘ Costs) and support one action (Action = ↷T80).

Table 5. PNNS argumentation.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
1	PNNS	“Using 80-type flour (T80) instead of 65-type flour (T65) for global breadmaking is relevant”	↷ T80	Nutrition	↗ Fibers
				↗ Micronutrients (μnut.)
2	PNNS	“T80 reduces costs due to an increased milling yield”	↷ T80	Technology	↘ Process skills
			Economy	↘ Costs
3	PNNS	“High-fiber diet reduces the public health costs”	↷ T80	Economy	↘ Costs

However, these arguments are hampered by other viewpoints and strong reserves on behalf of concerned wheat processing stakeholders. For instance, baker and miller professionals are apprehensive about possible impacts on their core activities. The French milling profession is pushing for a reconsideration of the PNNS recommendations. A scientific report investigating nutritional impacts of 80-type flour was used. In Table 6, we list arguments from millers’ profession (Stakeh. = Millers), which take different concerns into account, promote other goals (Goal (s) = ↗ Segmented Supply, ↗ Process Skills, ↗ Benefits) and support conservative action (Action = ⥀ T65) or a reconsideration of the recommendation, by using another indicator instead of the ash content (Action = ↷ Indicator), which can be seen as conflicting with both ⥀ T65 and ↷ T80 actions.

Table 6. Millers’ argumentation, Part 1.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
1	Millers	“Not prescribing only one type of flour”	⥀ T65	Economy	↗ Segmented Supply
2	Millers	“The composition of T65 and T80 are not significantly different except for fibers”	⥀ T65	Nutrition	↗ Micronutrients (μnut.)
3	Millers	“Ash content is not an absolute indicator of fiber content”	↷ I	Technology	↗ Process Skills
4	Millers	“Production of T80 flour would be more expensive due to the mix of several flours”	⥀ T65	Economy	↘ Costs
			Technology	↗ Process skills
5	Millers	“83% of consumers consume more white bread than whole bread to a point of satiety”	⥀ T65	Economy	↗ Benefits
6	Millers	“Raising the daily T65 consumption to raise the fiber content input in the diet”	⥀ T65	Nutrition	↗ Fibers
			Economy	↗ Micronutrients (μnut.)
				↗ Benefits

In response, part of the reason for the last argument is put forward by defenders of the recommendations (Stakeh. = PNNS, Goal(s) = ↘ Salt, Action = ↷ T80) (Table 7).

Table 7. PNNS response.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
4	PNNS	“Raising the daily T65 consumption involves increasing salt intake in the diet”	↷ T80	Nutrition	↘ Salt

In some cases, the precautionary principle can be decisive in the decision process. In this case study, the potential risk of causing harm to consumers is insignificant, but sanitary criteria may sometimes be preferred to nutritional criteria. In Table 8, we list other arguments from millers (Stakeh. = Millers), which take new concerns into account (Concern (s) = Sanitary), promote other goals (Goal (s) = ↘ Mycotoxins, ↘ Pesticide Residues, ↘ Phytic Acid) and support conservative action or specialized recommendations (Action = ⥀ T65, ↷ T80 & D., ↷ T80 & O.).

Table 8. Millers’ argumentation, Part 2.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
7	Millers	“Raising the flour extraction rate causes an increase in flour contaminants”	⥀ T65	Sanitary	↘ Mycotoxins
				↘ Pesticide residues
8	Millers	“Wheat pretreatments (such as debranning) could decrease mycotoxins”	↷ T80 & D	Sanitary	↘ Mycotoxins
			Technology	↗ Process skills
9	Millers	“Wheat pretreatments increase process costs”	⥀ T65	Economy	↘ Costs
10	Millers	“Making organic bread allows to avoid pesticide residues”	↷ T80 & O	Sanitary	↘ Pesticides residues
			Economy	↗Segmented supply
11	Millers	“Raising flour extraction rate causes a rise in phytic acid”	⥀ T65	Nutrition	↘ Phytic Acid

Bakers are anxious for a sale decrease based on the recommendations of the public health policy. Changing the taste or texture of T80 bread can have a significant impact on daily bread purchasing by consumers. Nevertheless, boosting awareness on this change could have a positive effect on consumer willingness to pay for this type of French baguette. In Table 9, we list arguments from the bakers’ profession (Stakeh. = Bakers), which take original concerns into account (Concern (s) = Hedonism), promote other goals (Goal(s) = Organoleptic Preference, ↗ Manufacturing Skills) and support conservative action, reformist action, or specialized recommendations (Action = ⥀ T65, ↷ T80, ↷ T80 & S., ↷ T80 & T).

Table 9. Bakers argumentation.
	Stakeh.	Reason	Action	Concern (s)	Goal (s)
1	Bakers	“Sourdough in breadmaking allows phytate degradation (due to low pH)”	↷ T80 & S	Nutrition	↘ Phytic Acid
2	Bakers	“Organoleptic acceptability for T80 is challenging (crunchiness, tasting, … )”	⥀ T65	Hedonism	↗ Organoleptic preference
				Economy	↗ Segmented supply
3	Bakers	“Consumer acceptance for T80 bread requires adaptation of the bread-making conditions (traditional proofing)”	↷ T80 & T	Hedonism	↗ Organoleptic preference
				Technology	↗ Manufacturing skills
				Economy	↗ Segmented supply
4	Bakers	“Diagram adaptation for T80 increases the manufacturing costs”	⥀ T65	Economy	↘ Costs
5	Bakers	“Consumers seem to be willing to pay 12% more for a baguette labelled ‘source of fibre”	↷ T80	Economy	↗ Benefits
3.3. The proposed argumentation model

First, it seems more realistic to consider only attacks between arguments expressed on the same concern. For instance, during a negotiation process, before being pooled on a common and arbitrary scale, a nutritional argument has nothing to do with an economic argument. However, two viewpoints can legitimately claim to be about the same concern. Some nutritionists will give priority to abundance of a given component while others will give preference to low anti-nutritional factors. In a given concern, we propose to consider an audience as an argumentative context, establishing preferences between arguments expressed in this specific concern. Sets of prioritized goals characterize contextual preferences.

Definition 5

An extended (argumentation-based) decision framework dealing with concerns and prioritized goals DFext, is a tuple
defined as follows:

•

    is a set of concerns,
•

are sets of goals,

    is the set of goals that are relevant in concern ci,
•

    ⊵ = ⊵1, … , ⊵n are sets of total preorders on 
, with

    ,2
•

are sets of actions; actions from distinct sets are mutually exclusive,

    is equipped with a strict partial order ∠i (called the specialization relation),
•

are sets of arguments, is the set of arguments that are expressed in concern ci, ( maps an argument to one or several goals and

    maps an argument to one action).

From the extended framework DFext and for each concern ci, a contextual preference-based argumentation framework CPAFi can be extracted that corresponds to debates in a specific concern (e.g nutrition, etc.), where arguments are conflicting in the case of incomparable or specialized actions, and are preferred on the basis of the prioritization goals.

Definition 6

From an
, a set of argumentation frameworks can be extracted {CPAF1, … , CPAFn}, where is a contextual preference-based argumentation framework defined as follows:

•

    is the set of arguments expressed in concern ci,
•

is an attack relation such that if there is no such that , or there is

    such that (action(α), action(β)) ∈ ∠i.
•

are contextual preferences such that if there is gα ∈ goal(α) such that for all

    .

A CPAFi can also be defined as a tuple
with is a defeat relation such that iff and

.3

Case study cont. Nutritional concern

The graph representing the non-symetric attack relation between arguments expressed in “Nutrition” concern (see Tables 5–9) is depicted in Fig. 3. This graph is automatically generated by the collective determination of actions and formalization of arguments.
Directed graph representing the arguments and attack relations in the…

    

Fig. 3. Directed graph representing the arguments and attack relations in the nutritional concern.

After collecting arguments, promoted goals and supported actions, several viewpoints can be expressed in the different concerns. In this model, they will be represented by a prioritization on goals, for instance the PNNS stakeholder has expressed a recommendation for “Increasing Fibers” (because of obesity, diabetes, etc.), and a recommendation for “Decreasing Salt” (to avoid cardiovascular disease, etc.). The model allows us to express several preorders on these goals, according to targeted audiences. The model then computes the representation of the argumentation framework, and outputs recommended actions.

Case study cont. Audiences for outcomes

In this contribution, we propose to deal with four audiences of nutritional concern (denoted cN), see Table 10. These audiences are four kinds of consumers: obeses, people with iron deficiency, people with cardivascular disease and vegetarians, and define preorders on the set of goals

. The representation from Fig. 4 describes the argumentation model obtained after the introduction of audiences from Table 10. For each audience, the model allows to determine if an argument from the system is within (full circle) or outside of (dashed circle) the set of preferred extensions. According to Definition 4, the system proposes several outputed recommendations stemming from a given audience. Note that the audience for decreasing salt tips the balance in favour of a recommendation for the T80 bread, while the audience for decreasing phytic acid pushes to specify recommendations towards a natural sourdough bread or a conservative T65 bread. Other audiences are in favor of a status quo.

Table 10. Nutritional audiences.
	Description	Audiences
1	Fiber preference (i.e., obesity)	↗ Fibers
nut Salt
P.A.
2	Micronutritient preference (i.e., iron deficiency)	↗ μnut.
Fibers Salt
P.A.
3	Diminution of salt (i.e., cardivascular disease)	↘ Salt
Fibers nut.
P.A.
4	Prevention of phytic acid (i.e., vegetarians)	↘ P.A.
Fibers nut

Salt
Directed graphs stemming from audiences

    

Fig. 4. Directed graphs stemming from audiences.
3.4. Recommended actions for another concern and audience

The DFext framework also integrates argumentation for the other concerns (Sanitary, Technology, Economy and Hedonism). Table 11 lists possible audiences based on the sanitary concern and summarizes the outputed recommendations. In the sanitary concern, the two recommendations “debranning wheat flour” (↷ T80 & P.) and “organic bread” (↷ T80 & O.) can be aggregated into a single recommendation (debranning and organic bread (↷) T80 & D.O.) since both actions are mutually consistent. In the economic concern, this output can be counterbalanced. For instance, none of these actions is recommended when reducing costs and increasing benefits are preferred. We thus need to enhance the model with aggregation procedures recommending relevant actions in situations where “weighted preferences” can be elicited and heterogeneous concerns are merged. This is ongoing work.

Table 11. Sanitary audiences.
Audience	Recommended Action (s)
↘ Mycotoxins
Pesticide residues	⥀ T65, ↷ T80 & D
↘ Pesticide residues
Mycotoxins	↷ T80 & O
↘ Mycotoxins
Pesticide residues	⥀ T65, ↷ T80 & D, ↷ T80 & O
4. Conclusion

As with any policy action, decision makers systematically rely on arguments from relevant concerns (health, economy, service, etc.) in order to recommend a decision with positive impacts. Thereby in the PNNS public policy, preferential concerns are “health and nutrition”, nevertheless secondary concerns such as processing, economy or hedonism also appear in several assessments.

In this case study, policy decision consists of global recommendations aimed at changing the type of flour used in the common French baguette bread sold in bakeries and retailed in institutional or school catering. The recommendations are supported by nutritional arguments, related to increasing fibers, and buttressed by economic arguments related to increasing yield of raw material extraction (wheat). Classically, the argumentation aims to transfer to the recommendations the adherence accorded to the reasons. Thus, decision makers, millers, bakers or technologists, who have to take heterogeneous considerations into account (sanitary, hedonism, etc.), are engaged in several argumentation processes that shift recommendations in favor of consensus (↷ T80), tradeoff (↷ T80 & Specialization), or conservative rejection (⥁ T65).

The aim of the approach described in this paper is first to formalize real-world arguments and then to refine existing decision-based argumentation frameworks. This approach addresses the three dimensions of argumentation models (see the recent synthesis on argumentation models for knowledge representation in Bentahar, Moulin, & Bélanger (2010)): micro (the internal structure of an argument), macro (the relationships between arguments) and rhetorical (taking the audience’s perception of arguments into account). Models presented in the literature generally consider only one, and at most two, of these dimensions.

Although this case study represents an original approach in the A.I. field and an introspective approach in the agrifood chain field, several methods implemented to deal with stakeholders’ reasoning in a real debate through an analysis of argumentation (especially (Gottsegen, 1998; Maguire & Boiney, 1994)) have been proposed for different applications. Our generic approach respects the concepts of principle negotiation, including (1) separating stakeholders from the problem, (2) focusing on interests (cf. “reasons”) and not on positions (cf. “actions”), (3) inventing options (cf. “specialized actions”) for mutual gain, and (4) using objective criteria (cf. “goals”). Nonetheless, it initially requires an expensive data modeling task, which cannot be automatised, and heavily depends on the quality of expertise elicitation (completeness, relevance, etc.). Future trends and original decision support tools involving argumentation methods could be a relevant way to help the stakeholders eliciting and formalizing arguments, which would make them more involved in the decision process and would facilitate interactions between all the stakeholders.

As shown in this paper, such a decision support system can also be of interest to target a food product for a given (and not a global) segment of consumers. This “highly qualitative” method cannot be handled with conventional approaches, especially in multicriteria decision methods: the notions of actions (options) and goals (criteria) are common to both approaches. Several analogies can also be drawn, in the medical field, where arguments from different analyses are used to target a diagnosis for patients. More generally, arbitration-based argumentation is a promising approach to help humans make well balanced decisions, considering for instance the three pillars of the sustainability concept (social, environmental and economic).