Evaluating student learning using concept maps and Markov chains

Abstract

In this paper we describe a tool that can be effectively used to evaluate student learning outcomes using concept maps and Markov chain analysis. The main purpose of this tool is to advance the use of artificial intelligence techniques by using concept maps and Markov chains in evaluating a student’s understanding of a particular topic of study using concept maps. The method used in the tool makes use of XML parsing to perform the required evaluation. For the purpose of experimenting this tool we have taken into consideration concept maps developed by students enrolled in two different courses in Computer Science. The result of this experimentation is also discussed.

Keywords
Concept maps
Student evaluation
Artificial intelligence
Finite Markov chains
Transition matrix
XML parsing

1. Introduction

Concept maps are visual representations of a particular topic. They are used for organizing and representing knowledge. Concept maps can be utilized more effectively to determine the depth of knowledge possessed by a student (McClure, Sonak, & Suen, 1999; Nesbit & Adescope, 2006), when compared to using traditional forms of assessment such as multiple-choice exams. Concept maps provide visual data to the instructors on student misconceptions and their level of understanding. Hence the concept maps can be helpful to develop certain abilities such as:

•

    The ability to draw reasonable inferences by identifying the key concepts on a topic.
•

    The ability to synthesize and integrate the information and ideas.
•

    The ability to learn concepts and theories in the area of study.

A concept within a concept map is usually represented in rectangular boxes or labels and is connected with relationships with labeled arrows. The label can be a word, number or a special symbol. These concepts are linked by linking phrases or relationships. The technique or framework for organizing the conceptual information in process of defining a sentence using the relationships among different concepts is called “Concept Mapping” (Funaoi, Yamaguchi, & Inagki, 2002; Gurupur, Sakoglu, Jain, & Tanik, 2014; Lin, 2002; Strautmane, 2012). When two or more concepts are connected using phrases and relationships to form meaningful statements, such a statement is termed as a “Proposition” as described by Daley, Canas, and Schweitzer (2007). These are also considered as semantic units or units of meaning (Castles, 2008). These propositions (Correia, 2012; Dabbagh, 2001; Mahler, Hoz, Fischl, Tov-Ly, & Lernau, 1991; Álvarez-Montero, Sáenz-Pérez, & Vaquero-Sánchez, 2015) represent information about a particular topic as seen in Fig. 1.
Concept map for showing prepositions representing information

   

Fig. 1. Concept map for showing prepositions representing information.

In Fig. 1, “Includes”, “Has” and “Is” are examples of relationships that are used to link concepts. Here Root Concept → Includes → General Concept 1 is a meaningful statement. One can use the concept maps not only as a learning tool but also as an evaluation (Najdawi & Ghatasha, 2012) tool for classroom assignments. This encourages students to use meaningful mode learning patterns (Calafate, Cano, & Manzoni, 2009; Siddharth, 2010).

Based on the aforementioned statements a project was developed based on the following objectives:

•

    To develop a tool that can be used to evaluate a student’s depth of understanding (Jain, Gurupur, & Faulkenberry, 2013) using concept maps and Markov chains.
•

    To develop a user friendly tool for the instructors to evaluate the concept map (Jain et al., 2013).

Based on these objectives, a tool is developed that evaluates concept maps where the instructor can use this tool to measure the performance (Leake, Maguitman, & Reichherzer, 2013; Novak & Canas, 2006; Wang & Yisheng, 2003; Zvacek, Restivo, & Chouzal, 2012) of the students enrolled in the course. The research question targeted by the tool is, “Can we use concept maps in conjunction with Markov chains to measure a student’s understanding of a topic in study?” The research question is based on the following criteria: Markov chains can be a powerful method of measuring predictability and pattern recognition. Although, this is not of the stated objectives of this particular project, it opens the door to the development of more powerful techniques using neural networks and fuzzy logic.
1.1. Related work

McClure et al. (1999) evaluated psychometric and practical aspects of using concept maps in class room assessments. Their work compares the following six evaluation methods.

(1)

    Holistic (score awarded by examining concept map as a whole).
(2)

    Holistic with master map (used as a reference for awarding scores).
(3)

    Relational (score awarded by examining each proposition connecting two concepts).
(4)

    Relational with master map.
(5)

    Structural (score awarded based on the number of hierarchical levels and crosslinks identified on the maps).
(6)

    Structural with master map.

These six evaluation methods are evaluated in terms of their reliability and validity by collecting and evaluating concept maps constructed by students. Results of the study suggested that the selection of a scoring method has an effect on the score reliability and that most reliable scores are produced by using the relational scoring method with a master map.

Anohina, Vilkelis, & Lukasenko (2009) argue that it is not correct to compare a teacher’s and a student’s concept maps only by examining the equivalence of relationships between both maps because people construct knowledge differently (Anohina & Grundspenkis, 2009). Their work presents a mechanism that can be used in conjunction with a tool that enables systematic knowledge assessment of a student’s concept maps.

Their system offers concept map based tasks that increase in difficulty from low to high. The tool allows teachers to configure assessments that incrementally examines the knowledge possessed by students. In order to calculate the total score, all possible patterns of answers for each task are assigned with a pre-defined score.

Anderson & Huang (1989) investigated the effectiveness of learning with the help of concept maps and measured the effect of reading expository text during assessment. They have used the following in their research method:

•

    Provided high school students with initial training in constructing concept maps.
•

    Conducted mapping test to gauge students’ ability in building concept maps.
•

    Divided students into two groups, good-mappers and poor-mappers based on their score in the mapping test.
•

    All students were further divided students into following instructional groups:

    a.

        No instruction: no instructions provided about the topic in the mapping test.
    b.

        Read only: provided a passage about the topic in the mapping test.
    c.

        Read plus slides: provided slides in addition to the passage about the topic in the mapping test.

•

    All students took an additional post-instructional mapping test where students were given instructions based on their instructional groups and were provided with the structure of the concept map and were requested to construct the concept map.
•

    Students’ concept maps were compared to a master map and the required score was assigned using twenty pre-defined accuracy categories.

Their results provided the following observations:

•

    Good-mappers scored significantly higher than poor-mappers.
•

    Students in read plus slides and read only groups scored better than no instruction group.

AISLE (Jain, Gurupur, Schroeder, & Faulkenberry, 2014) is also a tool that has similar objectives and methods to evaluate students. Here we would like to take the opportunity to inform the readers that this paper is an extension of the research conducted with AISLE. Like any other tool AISLE suffered from some drawbacks. Some of these limitations have been successfully addressed in this project.
2. Material and methods

The method used by the tool to evaluate a student’s understanding on specific topics as discussed in the class is different from the regular methods such as quizzes, oral presentations on topics related to the course.

In order to make the tool successful and different from other existing tools which are used to evaluate the concept maps, it has to include the following features:

•

    A plausible mechanism to measure the knowledge contained in the concept maps.
•

    A usable interface for the instructor to upload XML-based documents developed from concept maps and then perceive the results.
•

    Accommodating large concept maps in the process.

As mentioned before, there is a need to develop a tool that can evaluate the knowledge present in the concept maps. If the student uses concept maps in planning and representing the knowledge based on his understanding of a specific topic, this may help students to realize the gaps in their understanding (Darmofal, Soderholm, & Brodeur, 2002; Jihong & Wen, 2011). Sometimes students may find it difficult in identifying the key concepts in a text, lecture or other forms of representation (Jain et al., 2014). Such students may fail to construct powerful concepts and propositional frameworks which lead them to conceptualize learning (Chong & Kang, 2011; Jihong & Wen, 2011) as a memorizing technique. Hence a concept map significantly helps the students to clearly express the comprehension of concepts and their conceptual interrelationships (Funaoi et al., 2002; Novak & Canas, 2008).

Our tool performs the evaluation of concept maps using three main modules. These modules are as described below:

•

    XML Analyzer Module: the XML document (Chong and Kang, 2011) is extracted from the concept maps developed by the students. This module identifies all the key concepts, relations and the possible connections from the concept map that are embedded in the XML files by parsing these files. This information is then passed to the Markov Chain Analysis Module. Here we would like to note that the XML analysis is similar to that performed in AISLE (Jain et al., 2014) by Jain et al.
•

    Markov Chain Analysis Module: this module gathers the required data and develops the hierarchy (Derbensteva, Safayeni, & Canas, 2004; Gurupur & Sadasivam, 2009) for the concept map. This module carries out all the assessment and the results are then sent to the User Interaction Module.
•

    User Interaction Module: the web based application interacts with the instructor to perform analysis where the information from all the concept maps is given to the instructor in form of charts that are developed by this module.

Fig. 2 describes the overview of the evaluation tool. As seen each module performs the tasks as expected.

•

    In the first step, the students develop the concept maps based on their understanding by identifying the key concepts about the topic.
•

    The tool will provide the charts based on the knowledge contained (Gurupur & Sadasivam, 2009; Novak & Gowin, 1984) in the concept maps to the instructor.

Overview of the evaluation tool

   

Fig. 2. Overview of the evaluation tool.
3. Calculation
3.1. Analysis of concept maps

The instructor uses the concept map developed by the students to develop the XML-based document using CMap Tools software (Novak & Canas, 2006) and feeds it to the tool to receive the statistics based on Finite Markov chains (Issacson & Madsen, 1976; Kemeny & Snell, 1976; Ross, 1993). To generate the required statistics, the hierarchy involved in the concept map is used. This can be explained using Fig. 1. For example, consider the concept map described in Fig. 1 where the analysis begins from the root concept “American History”.

As seen from the above concept map, the key concepts are identified by noticing the historical moments that are included in the root concept. The concept maps are then converted into an XML-based (Jain et al., 2013; Zvacek et al., 2012) document to provide machine-actability. The following steps provide a brief description of the use of concept maps to develop the system:

•

    Initially a concept map is developed by the instructor which is used as reference for evaluating the students’ concept maps.
•

    In the next step, we convert the concept map into an XML-based document (Jain et al., 2013).
•

    A Java parser is used to extract concepts and their associated relations from the XML-based document.
•

    Finally, the extracted information is used to develop the required statistics that is presented to the instructor (Jain et al., 2013).

The hierarchy represented in the concept maps is developed using Concept Mapping technique which identifies the connectivity between the concepts. In Concept Mapping we identify the concepts, relations and hierarchically organize these concepts. After this we differentiate the concepts into different levels where the lowermost level represents the most important information about a particular topic. Our analysis identifies three different levels of detail: (a) Gist level, (b) Support level, and (c) Detail level.

In the Hierarchy for Finite Markov Chain (FMC), there is only one concept that is always present at the Gist level and it is always the root node of the concept. The concepts after the root node belongs to the Support level and concepts interlinked to the Support level are at the Detail level. The concepts beyond the Detail level will be in both Support and Detail levels. This hierarchy classification helps in identifying the level of understanding of knowledge represented in the concept maps. The scoring system is developed for all the concepts that are present in the concept map (Castles, 2008; Jain et al., 2013, 2014). The algorithm for scoring is as follows:

Scoring Algorithm:

•

    read score [count (

    )]
•

    for j: 

•

    score[j] = 5
•

    sum: sum of all scores in each level.

For any concept map, information can be collected from XML file by parsing using DOM parser. The values collected from these XML files are as shown below:

(1)

    Number of concepts that are present in the hierarchy.
(2)

    Number of relations that links to the concepts in the hierarchy.
(3)

    Scores that are given to each concept in the hierarchy.

Detail level concepts signify the depth about the topic. This scoring system implemented here is based on the structure of the concept map. We believe that the depth of the hierarchy represented in the concept map determines the level at which a student understands (Jain et al., 2013) the topic in study. Fig. 4 shows scoring for the concept map with respect to the hierarchy represented in the concept map. For each level we calculate the scores that are given to these concepts (Fig. 3).
Sample concept map 1

   

Fig. 3. Sample concept map 1.
Hierarchy and scoring of concepts in concept map 1

   

Fig. 4. Hierarchy and scoring of concepts in concept map 1.
3.2. Specifications for finite state Markov models

The specifications (Tarjan, 1983; Taylor & Karlin, 1994) for the Markov chain model include:

(1)

    Identify the possible states: define states which include all information that has been accumulated from the concept map that has some relevant information about the understanding of a specific topic.
(2)

    Identify the possible transitions between the states: after knowing the states, identify the possible transitions that may take between these states.
(3)

    Calculation of probabilities: after finding the possible transitions for the states, find the conditional probabilities defined with respect to the hierarchy represented in the concept map.

3.3. Concept maps and finite Markov chains

A FMC (Kemeny & Snell, 1976; Sato, Abe, & Takeda, 1982; Tarjan, 1983) can be defined as a mathematical, memory less, homogenous discrete stochastic process that undergoes transitions (Raviv, 1967; Scollnik & their Actuarial Applications, 2013; Taylor & Karlin, 1994) from one state to another between a finite number of possible states (Xie & Beerel, 1998). As mentioned before, when it comes to concept maps it is convenient to classify the information by concepts as Gist level, Supporting level and Detail level. To identify a particular state the following pieces of information is used (Castles, 2008; Howard, 1971; McMillan, 1993):

•

    “Concept” that identify the key elements about the topic.
•

    “Relation” that support the key elements.
•

    “Score” which is given for each element in the hierarchy.

At every instant in step n, the Markov chain will always be in one of these states. A process starts in one of the states and moves from one state to another state which is termed as “transitions.” For any concept map, the state j is accessible from state i if it is possible to have a transition from state i to j (denoted as i → j and i, j 

 {Concept, Relation, Score}). Here what is known is the probability that the chain moves from state i to state j in steps that can be clearly identified (Kemeny & Snell, 1976; Tarjan, 1983; Taylor & Karlin, 1994). This probability is termed as Transition probability or Markov probability (Scollnik, 2013) for the Markov chain. These probabilities are constant with respect to time as the concept maps represent knowledge that deals with stationary distributions. The transitions that can occur for any concept map are as follows:

i.

    Remain in the same state that can be either in Concept or Relation or Score states.
ii.

    Move from one state to the previous state.
iii.

    Move from one state to the next state.

Table 1 shows the all the possible transitions that can take place between any two states in a concept map.

Table 1. Identifying transitions for states in the concept map.
States	Conventions
Concept	The state concept represents the number of concepts that are present in hierarchy of the concept map. The transition (Kemeny & Snell, 1976; Tarjan, 1983) exists between state concept to relation, score and itself

Relation	The state Relation represents the number of relations in the hierarchy of the concept map. The transition does not exist (Tarjan, 1983; Taylor & Karlin, 1994) for state relation to state concept as there are no relations at the Gist level. However, transitions exist for state Relation to state Score and itself

Score	The state score represents the score given for each concept in the hierarchy of the concept map. However, transitions exist (Kemeny & Snell, 1976; Tarjan, 1983) between state score to concept, relation and itself

Table 1 shows all the possible transitions that can take place between any two states in the concept map. For any two states i and j, there exists a probability p(i, j) (Scollnik, 2013; Tarjan, 1983; Taylor & Karlin, 1994) at the initial step that describes the transition between these states. The matrix P of the p(i, j) is called the transition probability matrix or the Markov matrix of the chain and has following properties:
(3a)
(3b)
where i, j are any two states and i, j 

 {Concept, Relation, Score}.

– transition probability from state i to state j.

– summation of all possible transition probabilities that are possible for state i to all states j.

The FMC has the following property (Hocaoglu, Gerek, & Kurban, 2008; Sato et al., 1982): the transition matrix P does not change with steps (Raviv, 1967; Scollnik, 2013), i.e., the probability of a transition from one state to another does not depend upon number of steps the chain has taken.

Table 2 represents the calculations for transition probabilities between any two given states that are defined in the concept map.

Table 2. Calculating one step transition probability between any two states in the concept map.
States	Transition probabilities defined with respect to hierarchy in the concept map
Concept	Gist level: the ratio of number of concepts in Gist to total number of concepts in the hierarchy of the concept map. Supporting level: the ratio of number of concepts in Support to total number of concepts in the hierarchy of the concept map. Detail level: the ratio of number of concepts in Detail to total number of concepts in the hierarchy of the concept map

Relation	Gist level: no transition can take place in this level. Supporting level: the ratio of number of incoming relations to all support concepts to total number of relations in the hierarchy of the concept map. Detail level: the ratio of number of incoming relations to all detail concepts to the total number of relations in the hierarchy of the concept map

Score	Gist level: ratio of total scores for gist concept to total score for the concept map. Supporting level: the Ratio of total scores in support concepts to total score for the concept map. Detail level: the ratio of total scores in detail concepts to the total score for the concept map

All the above calculations indicate the transitional probability that is defined with respect to the hierarchy represented in the concept map. The graphical representation of this transitional probability is represented using the Markov State Diagram (Hocaoglu et al., 2008; Yong, Xueshan, & Ying, 2012) for the concept map as represented in Fig. 5. Fig. 5 shows the three states for any concept map with their respective transitions of going from one state to another with respect to their levels.
Transition state diagram for the concept map

   

Fig. 5. Transition state diagram for the concept map.

In this figure we have depicted a 3-state Markov chain has states of Concept, Relation and Score which are represented in circles. The transitions that can take place are represented by directed arrows with transition probability values. The states are recurrent i.e., all the states are reachable. The chain is aperiodic (Kemeny and Snell, 1976; Tarjan, 1983; Taylor and Karlin, 1994) since it can return to the same state with non-zero probability in any number of steps. The chain is irreducible (Scollnik, 2013; Taylor & Karlin, 1994) since it is possible to go from any state to another state with non-zero probability in a finite number of steps. Based on the above state transition diagram, the transition matrix or Markov matrix P is given as
(3c)

where P is the transition matrix of a Markov chain.

This matrix P is also identified as a stochastic matrix (Tarjan, 1983; Taylor and Karlin, 1994) since the elements in each row sum to 1. In FMC, the probability starting in state i going to state j to form a chain in two steps is the sum over k of probability of going first to k and then to j. This transition does not depend upon any previous conditions of how the state has been reached. The first step transition of this Markov chain is given as
(4)
where

is the (i, j) element of the transition matrix [P2].

Hence from the above matrix,

Similarly,
is the nth step transition probability between the states i and j is the (i, j) element of the nth power of matrix [P]. Since , this means that
(5)

where i, j are the states and k is the intermediate state between i and j.

    Here m, and n are the number of transitions.

    is the ijth element of the matrix m + n steps transition matrix

    is the probability at mth step for state i to k and

    pn(k, j) is the probability at nth step for state k to j.

Eq. (5) is known as Chapman–Kolmogorov equation (Perninge & Soder, 2010; Tarjan, 1983; Taylor & Karlin, 1994). If the chain is repeated for a very large steps n, the Markov chains eventually enters a steady state, in the sense that the transition probabilities will become steady at certain value. By applying Markov chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) (Hollenberg, 1984; Perninge and Soder, 2010) simulation method to any transition matrices that can be formed for any concept map, the steady state distribution exists for any chain over n steps and it converges to stationary distribution as n → ∞. Hence we continue the process for the Markov chain until we reach 32 steps. FMC converges to a certain value i.e.,
in each state. Here, we can confirm the following:

(1)

    [Pn] converges as n → ∞.
(2)

    For each column j, the transition probabilities 

and

    should all tend toward same value.
(3)

    exists for the transition matrix [33] [34] and is independent of state.

Hence

.

The stationary value (Hollenberg, 1984; Perninge and Soder, 2010; Tarjan, 1983) for each row in transition matrix shows the information measurement that is measured for each state in the concept map. Summation of all the transition probability values in a row is always approximately equal to one and this value does not depend on previous states. To perform the required analysis we add all these values to a particular column. The first column indicates the Gist level, the second indicates the Support level and the third column indicates the Detail level for the concepts.

The stationary vector A1 for this concept map 1 after adding all the values is given by:

3.4. Evaluation of concept maps

So far, we have shown how the concept maps are used to develop the statistics. We would now like to describe the evaluation of these concepts maps developed by students. The stationary vectors are used as a reference value to evaluate the concept maps using bar charts. To clearly describe the above discussion, we take two sample concept maps with same number of concepts in the concept map (Figs. 6 and 7).
Sample concept map 2

   

Fig. 6. Sample concept map 2.
Sample concept map 3

   

Fig. 7. Sample concept map 3.

For the above two sample concept maps, the transition matrix is calculated and stationary vectors are developed for each of these sample concept maps. Table 3 shows the comparison between sample concept maps depicted in Figs. 3, 6 and 7.

Table 3. Comparison between sample concept maps.
Parameter	Concept map 1	Concept map 2	Concept map 3
Number of concepts in hierarchy	21	9	11
Number of support level concepts	10	4	6
Number of Detail level concepts	10	4	4

Table 3 clearly shows that concept map 3 has higher number of concepts when compared to concept map 2 in the hierarchy. But they have the same number of concepts at the Detail level. This indicates that both concept maps 2 and 3 have the same amount of depth in the concepts but there is clear difference in the hierarchy represented in them. For example, concept map 2 goes two level deeper from the root node while concept map 3 has three levels of depth from its root. Fig. 8 depicts the bar graphs providing a comparison between concept maps 1, 2, and 3.
Bar chart distributions for concept maps

   

Fig. 8. Bar chart distributions for concept maps.

From Fig. 8, it is seen that concept map 1 has a higher Detail level indicating that it has better information in terms of the details covered when compared to the other maps considered for comparison. However, it has the least value at the Gist level. This indicates that the concept map 1 has higher connectivity with the root node. The concept map 3 has higher length in Support level which indicates that the concept map has not much depth information though it has more number of concepts in the hierarchy.
3.5. Parameters to evaluate the concept maps

To evaluate the concept maps, the parameters that play an important role are as follows:

(1)

    The length of the bar at the Detail level should be high as it indicates the depth in the information that is present in the concept map.
(2)

    The length of the bar at the Gist level should be low as it indicates the strength in terms of connectivity of the root node concept for the concept map. A higher level of Gist and a lower level of Detail indicate that many concepts were not covered in detail.
(3)

    The length of the bar in the Support level should be low as it indicates the supporting strength for the concepts in the concept map. Here, we do not want the supporting concepts to exceed the number of concepts at the Detail level.

4. Results
4.1. Analysis of concept maps for CSCI 428

A few students registered for CSCI 428 object oriented programming volunteered to develop concept maps based on the use of design patterns and object oriented design principles used for one of their homework’s. These maps developed provide some indication of the depth of their knowledge in object oriented programming and design in providing a solution for the assigned problem. Students represented their different ideas in representing their knowledge. These concept maps were evaluated to observe the depth of a student’s understanding of the topic. This experiment generated the results displayed in Fig. 9.
Bar chart distributions for the concept maps developed by students CSCI 428

   

Fig. 9. Bar chart distributions for the concept maps developed by students CSCI 428.

Fig. 9 shows that Student V has higher length in the Gist level and Support level and very low in Detail level. Hence it has less information in the concept map when compared with the rest of the students. Student I and Student II have equal heights at the Detail level. Since the tool provides an illustration of the concepts that are present in the Gist and Support level of the concept map, we evaluate this as a parameter for evaluating the concept map. Student I has higher Support level and a lower Gist level. This indicates that Student I has done well when compared to Student II in representing the required information in the concept map. Student VII and Student VIII both have the same intensity of information in the concept map. However, Student VII did well when compared with Student VIII. Student III, Student IV and Student VI have done well in representing the information in the form of a concept map. This can be seen clearly by analyzing the Detail level.
4.2. Analysis of concept maps for CSCI 359

In addition to the above student cohort a few students registered for CSCI 359, Systems Analysis and Design also volunteered to develop concept maps for developing a project using Scrum. The concept maps developed contained Product Backlogs and Sprint Backlogs that may be perceived by the student. This assignment focused on the depth and detail of a student’s comprehension of the project.

Fig. 10 shows the bar chart distributions with respect to the hierarchy in the concept map. Student 3 has less information in the concept map which can be observed from the length of the bar at the Detail level. This clearly identifies the fact that the student has identified fewer concepts and has represented a simple concept map with some basic ideas of implementing his project without much detail. Student 4 has higher length in Detail than Student 9, but this student has higher length at the Gist level indicating strength at the root node which is undesirable. Student 6 and Student 8 have done better in representing the information in the concept map which can be seen clearly in the chart. Student 7 has done better than Student 5 with all parameters of evaluation.
Bar chart distributions for the concept maps developed by students CSCI 359

   

Fig. 10. Bar chart distributions for the concept maps developed by students CSCI 359.
5. Discussion
5.1. Comparison with Related Projects

Unlike AISLE this tool is able to successfully process concept maps with circular chains of concepts. However, the validation of concept maps (Diego & Rivera, 2001) is still required to be performed by the instructor. Table 4 provides a comparison between our tool and some of the methods and techniques described in Section 2.

Table 4. Comparison of related projects.
Feature	Our work	McClure et al. (1999)	Anohina and Grundspenkis (2009)	Anderson and Huang (1989)
Automated	Yes	No	Yes	No
Students given a set of concepts for building concept map (for result collection)	No	Provided in some of the methods	No results	Yes
Mechanism used for scoring concept maps	Markov chains	Manual scoring using master map in some methods	Patterns	Using pre-defined accuracy categories
Visual tool for results	Yes	No	No	No
Prior training provided for students	No	Yes	No results	Yes
Use of master concept map for scoring	Yes	Used in some methods	No	Yes

From Table 4 we observe that our tool provides uniqueness when compared to other similar tools in providing visual results in the form of bar charts. However, we believe that our tool possesses the following limitations:

(a)

    Lack of machine learning techniques to evaluate the validity of the relationships included in the concept maps. This is basically attributed to the non-existence of a knowledge base that stores the related concepts.
(b)

    Identification of patterns with respect to concept names.

We believe that this limitation could be overcome by using knowledge bases that have domain knowledge (Gurupur & Tanik, 2012; Gurupur et al., 2012) stored in it.
5.2. Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have described a tool that can be effectively used in identifying the level of a student’s understanding of a particular topic using concept maps and Markov chains. We would like to mention to the reader that this tool was developed using Java and XML parsers to extract the necessary information from concept maps. Based on the experimentation and its associated observation we can conclude that our tool and the method associated with it will be useful for instructors in identifying and assessing their ability to induce good understanding of topics and improve their teaching methods.

Our future work for this project will be based on developing the following tools and techniques:

•

    Development of knowledge bases to support the validation of the concept maps developed.
•

    Developing tools and techniques for matching the concepts identified by the students to that in the knowledge base.
•

    Facilitating an automated feedback and training mechanism for the students to exclude or not allow the inclusion of unrelated concepts.
•

    Identification of patterns with respect to concept names within concept maps and the frequency of their occurrence to evaluate the direction of student learning.
•

    Further enhancing this research project by using neural networks and fuzzy logic to identify chains of concepts imbibed by a student.

Thereby further enhancing the use of artificial intelligence techniques in evaluating a student’s understanding of a topic.