Towards next generation electrochemical machining controllers: A fuzzy logic control approach to ECM

Abstract

Electrochemical machining (ECM) is a manufacturing process that offers a number of advantages (e.g. no mechanical stress) over its nearest competitors as certain trends in production move towards the micro scale. Maintaining optimum ECM process conditions ensures higher machining efficiency and performance. This paper presents the development of a fuzzy logic controller to add intelligence to the ECM process. An experimental ECM drilling rig, at University of Manchester, was improved through the integration of a fuzzy logic controller into the existing control system. Matlab (Fuzzy Logic Toolbox) was used to build a fuzzy logic controller system, which controls the feed rate of the tool and the flow rate of the electrolyte. The objective of the fuzzy logic controller was to improve machining performance and accuracy by controlling the ECM process variables. The results serve to introduce innovative possibilities and provide potential for future applications of fuzzy logic control (FLC) in ECM. Hybrid controllers that integrate fuzzy logic into the control system allow for “human like” decision-making intelligence to be incorporated into ECM controllers. The focus of this paper is the feasibility of FLC in ECM, but the results have the potential of being applied to EMM. As the future of ECM moves towards electrochemical micromachining (EMM), the need for process uncertainty control in this area may be met by FLC, which has advantages over conventional methods of process control.

Keywords
Fuzzy logic control (FLC)
Electrochemical machining (ECM)
Manufacturing process

1. Introduction

1Gap conditions in ECM are random in nature due to the variable state of the electrolyte condition and the machining process itself is subject to various practical complications (e.g. debris in the gap causing sparking) that affect machining performance (Yong, Yunfei, Guang, & Liangqiang, 2003). Also, critical operator machining decisions are based upon the operator’s knowledge and experience from using the rig. For this reason the application of fuzzy logic is well suited for such a control problem, as the fuzzy if-then rules provide the foundation for an expert knowledge-base and inference engine. This inference engine can then be incorporated into a control system to provide real-time decision-making intelligence to monitor and control the machining process. It was thus the main objective of the research to create a fuzzy logic controller to be integrated into the existing University of Manchester ECM rig Visual Basic (VB) control system, enabling the control system to act ‘intelligently’ throughout the machining process. Creating a fuzzy logic controller will serve two purposes: (1) to investigate the concept of integrating fuzzy logic into the experimental ECM drilling rig; and (2) to investigate the potential of fuzzy logic control (FLC) to ensure higher levels of machining performance through inter-electrode gap control.
2. Background information
2.1. Electrochemical and electrochemical micro machining

ECM is an electrochemical anodic dissolution process (De Barr & Oliver, 2002). Direct current is passed between a workpiece (the anode) and a pre-shaped tool (the cathode), with electrolyte flowing through the gap to complete the circuit. The tool shape is copied (formed) into the anodic workpiece surface through the metal being dissolved into metallic ions by electrolytic action. Hence ECM changes the shape of the workpiece by removing metal through electrolytic action. EMM has evolved from ECM due to miniaturisation developing as a future trend in production demands. Bhattacharyya, Mitra, and Boro (2002) comment that because of the inherent machining advantages ECM has over other processes, ECM appears to be very promising as a future micromachining technique (Bhattacharyya et al., 2002). These authors state that, “In EMM the inter-electrode gap control plays an important role.” It follows that the inter-electrode gap has a major role in the accuracy of the machining process (Bhattacharyya & Munda 2003a, 2003b; Bhattacharyya et al., 2002; De Silva and McGeough, 1998; Yong et al., 2003). In conclusion, Bhattacharyya et al. (2002) comment that further work is required into EMM inter-electrode gap control and machining parameter control. Bhattacharyya and Munda (2003a, 2003b) continued their work into EMM and presented further findings from their experimental EMM rig set-up. They discuss features such as inter-electrode gap control, which consists of a Boolean logic-based control system that compares power input signals to a reference voltage.

The performance of ECM is affected by many interlinking machining process variables (De Silva & McGeough, 1998). Optimum process conditions allow for high ECM performance in terms of surface finish and rate of machining. It follows that optimum process variables are desirable in order to ensure optimum machining conditions and performance. Process deterioration is identified through indirect interpretation of a process variable moving out of the acceptable operational range. The interlinking variables are highly nonlinear and complex in nature and it is therefore very difficult to develop an exact mathematical model to control the machining process. The result is that conventional linear control strategies become extremely complex to construct and may still not adequately model the ECM process. Existing operational procedures for ECM machines are mainly based upon in-house “trial and error” experiments to achieve process parameter optimisation. Kozak (2001) comments that, “ECM parameters and tool design still relies very much on the input by the human expert based on his personal knowledge and experience.” It seems that an industry standard, in terms of ECM/EMM optimum process parameters, may not be so straightforward.
2.2. Fuzzy logic

Zadeh (1965) introduced fuzzy set theory in the 1960s. He recognised that many shades of grey found in the real world were not covered by Boolean logic. In fuzzy logic instead of something being 100% true or false it deals in degrees of membership ranging from zero to one, and so something can be partially true and false at the same time. Classical Boolean logic prevailed before fuzzy logic, the idea being the whole universe could be either A or not-A and so everything is accounted for wholly either by one group or another. However, it was proven by Kosko (1994), that Classical Boolean logic is just a special case of fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic allows nonlinear functions to be modelled; it is easy to use, to understand and to implement.

Based upon the present authors’ research findings, FLC is ideally suited to ECM, as FLC is an effective control strategy for nonlinear/uncertain process applications. Applications of fuzzy logic have been proposed by the first author of this paper in a variety of applications such as maintenance (Yuniarto & Labib, 2006), design (Yuniarto & Labib, 2005), reconfigurable manufacturing (Abdi & Labib, 2004a, 2004b), and production scheduling (Sudiarso & Labib, 2002), as well as applications of fuzzy sets in design (Vanegas & Labib, 2005).

In recent times, published work relating to the application of fuzzy logic to ECM is limited. However, FLC has been applied to other members of the non-conventional machining processes family, e.g. electrodischarge machining (Lin, Chung, & Huang, 2001; Zhang et al., 2002). Surmann and Huser (1998) applied a fuzzy logic controller to electropolishing of cobalt chromium dental cast alloys. They presented a fuzzy logic controller with 16 fuzzy rules, which completely automated the polishing process. The fuzzy logic controller approach is used to extract key interlinking machining process features, capturing this knowledge in a fuzzy rule-base to be used as the control system’s inference engine. The addition of FLC to ECM provides expert real-time operational intelligence, which may result in more consistent levels of machining performance.
3. The ECM drilling rig

The following section presents three annotated pictures to enable the reader to gain an appreciation for the ECM drilling rig. Fig. 1 presents a picture of the whole ECM drilling rig, the major parts are identified as the control PC, the power supply and the ECM rig.
Picture showing the whole ECM drilling rig


Fig. 1. Picture showing the whole ECM drilling rig.

Fig. 2, presents a more detailed look at the ECM rig machining chamber. All physical drilling takes place within the machining tank. The tool is fed backwards and forwards manually using the stepper motor, which is controlled through the VB program on the PC. The tool is hollow to allow electrolyte to be pumped through it. It also has the negative electrode connected to it, which allows it to take a negative charge during machining. The positive electrode is also shown, which is attached to the vice that clamps the workpiece. The machining tank encases all machining activity and prevents the electrolyte from escaping. It also has two flow back tubes to allow process electrolyte to return to the main electrolyte tank. On some occasions electrolyte spray may escape from the tank and so a screen has been installed around the whole chamber to protect neighbouring rig components form the electrolyte, which is a 20% by weight sodium chloride (NaCl) solution. The ECM machining chamber is mounted upon a trolley table, which also has the conductivity meter on it. In this picture the 0.75 kW pump and automatic valve is shown. This draws electrolyte from the electrolyte tank and pumps it up to and out of the tool.
Picture showing the main ECM rig features


Fig. 2. Picture showing the main ECM rig features.

Finally, Fig. 3 presents the electrolyte management system. An optical flow meter is located just after the automatic valve to allow readings to be taken of the process electrolyte flow rate. The electrolyte tank holds a volume of around 125 l of solution and it has a lid to prevent corrosive electrolyte vapour from coming into contact with other rig components. There are two probes that take readings from the electrolyte: (1) Conductivity Probe and (2) Temperature Probe. All probe/meter readings are fed back to the PC and recorded. Just after the pump exit hole a T-junction pipefitting is installed with another manual gate valve connected after the T-branch. This manual gate valve allows for electrolyte over flow to be channelled back to the electrolyte tank. The 0.75 kW pump is not a variable supply pump, and always supplies at maximum output. As a result electrolyte supply maybe excessive and so the manual gate valve provides a means to redirect flow back to the electrolyte tank, thus reducing the flow of electrolyte to the process.
Picture showing the electrolyte management system


Fig. 3. Picture showing the electrolyte management system.
4. The fuzzy logic controller: design methodology
4.1. Analysis and partition of the control system

Previously, machining decisions were subject to interpretation from the machine operator, as the machine operator managed the VB controller and rig manually through indirect interpretation of process variable measurements (e.g. If the flow rate of the electrolyte reduces, then the manual flow valve is opened). In order to control the ECM drilling process, the following input variables were identified and measured: voltage, current, measured flow rate, electrolyte conductivity and electrolyte temperature. These are used to monitor the ECM drilling process and give the operator an indication of process conditions. As this was the first attempt at integrating FLC into the experimental ECM drilling rig, a simple fuzzy logic controller was created; but one that would still provide the means to investigate research objectives.

The fuzzy logic controller was created in Mathworks (2004) Matlab Fuzzy Logic Toolbox. Two fuzzy logic controllers, consisting of two inputs and one output each, were created to monitor and control both the feed rate and the flow rate (valve position) of the ECM process. Both could be combined together producing one fuzzy logic controller, consisting of two inputs and two outputs (see Fig. 4). However, the first author built two separate controllers because it was easier to investigate their robustness and accuracy when separate. This is not to say that they cannot be combined, but that they are separately constructed and later implemented as one fuzzy logic controller into the physical system. In the combined fuzzy logic controller there are two input variables, but they can be considered twice, giving four input variable. This is because in each case although the input variables are the same, they are constructed differently depending on the output they are mapped to. This is understood as the operator relating the inputs to the output, in each case, using different linguistic terminology, and so the Membership Functions (MFs) are different.
The fuzzy logic controller


Fig. 4. The fuzzy logic controller.
4.2. Defining the input and output membership functions

After deciding upon the inputs and outputs of the Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) the next step was to define all the MFs and universe of discourse for each variable. The number of MFs defines the precision of the system. The more MFs, with smaller scope, acting over the same universe of discourse, the more precision is built into the system. The trade-off here is that more MFs result in more rules, and one may come to a point where computer processing time is slow because of the number of rules the controller has to evaluate. Fuzzy logic allows precision to be traded off against significance and so depending upon the situation the number of MFs can be reduced with the system still yielding the desired output result. The universe of discourse of the MF, for each variable, was defined through previous experiments and operator rig experience/knowledge. For example, as the valve actuator is controlled through a 0–10 V input range, the universe of discourse is set from 0 to 10 V. Other universes of discourse are: Input current is 0–50 A; Input measured flow rate is 0–11 l/min; and output feed rate is −1.0–1.0 mm/min. All MFs and their labels, for each variable, can be seen in Figs. 5–7.
Input MFs for flow rate, current (left) and measured flow rate (right)


Fig. 5. Input MFs for flow rate, current (left) and measured flow rate (right).
Input MFs for feed rate, current (left) and measured flow rate (right)


Fig. 6. Input MFs for feed rate, current (left) and measured flow rate (right).
Out put MFs for flow rate (left) and feed rate (right)


Fig. 7. Out put MFs for flow rate (left) and feed rate (right).

The valve position, as mentioned previously, can be between 0 and 10 V. For output variable: feed rate, one MF allows for the control system to output reverse feed rate values. It also acts as a counter balance, in that when the FIS applies the COG method of areas that include MF: optimal and Reverse feed rate, smaller feed rates are the resulting output. In terms of the objective of this research to use fuzzy logic to maintain the inter-electrode gap, one can see that a more gradual change in output feed rate will result if process variables change.
4.3. Development of the rules

Fig. 8 shows the 15 rules generated, of which the first nine manage the electrolyte flow rate through the control of the rig’s valve/actuator set. Rules 10–15, control the tool feed rate, which accounts for the tool moving in either a positive (away from the workpiece) or negative (towards the workpiece) direction. All rules were generated through operator experience and then fine-tuned to provide the desired effect, which accounts for the number of rules being 15 and not 32. Rules 8 and 9 “slice” through the control domain and hence reduce the number of rules significantly.
The fuzzy rules


Fig. 8. The fuzzy rules.
4.4. Output control surfaces

This discussion aims to explain key control areas of the output surfaces generated from the FIS built in Matlab, relating this back to the physical ECM process. As the machining process begins the tool is fed towards the workpiece, current starts to increase and the flow rate either stays the same or drops slightly. This is recognised by the transient stage on the control surface (Fig. 9). Once the equilibrium position is reached the inter-electrode gap should remain reasonably constant, which is the optimum machining area of the control surface. It is the objective of the fuzzy logic controller to keep the ECM process within this optimum machining area of the control surface and so if flow rate reduces and/or the measured current increases the controller will output a result to bring conditions back to optimum.
Output control surface for feed rate


Fig. 9. Output control surface for feed rate.

Fig. 10 presents the output surface for flow rate control. The transient stage and the optimum machining area are also indicated on this surface. In the case where the measured flow rate drops and the measured current increases due to the tool moving too close to the workpiece, the output result is for the valve position to open to a maximum, i.e. 10 V, increasing the flow rate.
Output surface for flow rate control


Fig. 10. Output surface for flow rate control.
5. FLC integration and experimental methodology
5.1. FLC integration into the VB controller

The existing controller consisted of in-house software developed in VB to control the tool feed rate and collect real-time probe data every second. The introduction of the new valve/actuator set allowed for the electrolyte flow rate to be controlled using an upgraded version of the VB controller. The final upgrade phase for the VB controller was the integration of the FLC. Specific to this research project, the best way would be to make the VB program directly interrogate the FIS created in Matlab. This would be possible with further investigation into Matlab and Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE). Due to the research project timescales (Keasberry, 2004) this was not possible and an alternative method was used to integrate FLC into the existing VB controller. The method used was to generate look-up tables directly from the FLC based output control surfaces, within Matlab itself. The look-up tables contain the data points that describe the output surfaces created. So by integrating them into the VB controller they serve as the controller knowledge-base (inference engine), as the VB program was upgraded to compare process readings with values in the look-up tables, and then ‘decide’ upon what tool feed rate and electrolyte flow rate (valve position) to set as the output. The authors acknowledge that this has its limitations. Matlab will always generate the same number of surface data point (225 data points). The problem here is when the physical process returns a reading in-between data points. In this situation the VB program looks for the nearest data point to the reading, to acquire what action output value to take. Fig. 11 shows a system schematic diagram with the inclusion of the fuzzy logic controller. The FLC aspect of the PC controller acts as a ‘Black box’ within the VB controller, as it maps input space to output space using FLC.
System schematic diagram


Fig. 11. System schematic diagram.
5.2. Experimental methodology

All experiments use the same 6 mm diameter hollow tube tool; a starting feed rate of 0.7 mm/min (a rig specific optimum feed rate found through previous experimentation) and each hole was machined to a 10 mm depth. One of the tests that will be performed will be a FLC critical test, which involves forcing the tool into a short circuit situation and then turning on the FLC function of the ECM controller to see how the fuzzy logic controller performs in such a situation. This is an artificially generated situation and in reality the fuzzy logic controller will not allow the process to reach such dangerous conditions. However, this test is intended to prove that FLC can be used to keep ECM process conditions to optimum levels.
6. Experimental results and discussion
6.1. Critical test results

It can be observed that on three occasions the fuzzy logic controller brought the machining process back to optimum conditions (measured current and flow rate of approximately 20.0–25.0A and 6.0–9.0 l/min respectively), without any operator intervention. Critical conditions triggered the tool feed rate to reverse and also the automatic valve to open (see Fig. 12). Although the fuzzy logic controller slightly over-compensates for the critical current occurrence, this can be adjusted through ‘fine tuning’ of the MF. What these results serve to prove is that FLC can be used to gradually control the ECM process.
Graph showing the fuzzy controller correcting three critical machining…


Fig. 12. Graph showing the fuzzy controller correcting three critical machining situations.

This next result was created by a machining run that was totally managed by the fuzzy logic controller (see Fig. 13). This was the last machining run of this research project, and as a result the electrolyte was in its worst condition. The red circle2 shows the measured current increasing to its highest recorded level during the machining run. This result shows that the fuzzy logic controller ensured that the machining process finished without any sparking incidences.
Graph showing a fuzzy logic machined hole


Fig. 13. Graph showing a fuzzy logic machined hole.

The FLC approach to inter-electrode gap control is different from other gap control methods. Other methods (Bhattacharyya & Munda, 2003a, 2003b; Bhattacharyya et al., 2002; Yong et al., 2003), use Boolean logic systems, which detect a short-circuit situation and then have a logic sequence executed as a result. However, the FLC approach aims to totally avoid the incidence of a short-circuit situation. Although FLC maybe a novel approach there is still need for further refinement of the MFs to investigate the potential of a fuzzy logic controller producing better surface finishes.

Fig. 14 presents a picture of an axial section through the fuzzy logic machined hole. Poor surface finish is observed, however, this is explained as the fuzzy logic controller compensating for the poor electrolyte conditions to avoid process sparking. An alternatively reason for this poor finish could be explained by the method of integrating FLC into the ECM controller. If the method of integrating FLC into the ECM controller were by using DDE with Matlab, then the full FIS created in Matlab would be interrogated for output direction. Perhaps this would, in itself, solve part of the poor surface finish problem, as changes in output results would certainly be gradual and true to the fuzzy output control surfaces.
Picture showing an axial section through a 10mm depth hole machined using the…


Fig. 14. Picture showing an axial section through a 10 mm depth hole machined using the fuzzy logic ECM controller.
6.2. General discussions
6.2.1. FLC as an ECM controller

The fact that process control was still achieved, even in the presence of poor electrolyte conditions, leads to experimental results being described as encouraging. The encouraging results suggest that the application of FLC to ensure higher levels of machining performance in ECM has potential. The fuzzy logic controller is observed to perform ‘decisions’ and actions inline with what a human operator would do. The major advantage it has over manual machining is that the fuzzy logic controller’s decisions and actions are instantaneous; with simultaneous control of both the tool feed rate and the valve position. In the case of manual machining the human operator would manually adjust both the tool feed rate and the valve position one after the other. FLC allows the experience and knowledge of the machine operator to be elicited into the process controller allowing it to act faster and upon multiple machine variables.
6.2.2. Hybrid controllers and inter-electrode gap control

The term hybrid controller within this article is defined as a controller that combines FLC with other methods of control to achieve the desired process performance characteristics. The potential of FLC in ECM can be analysed on two different levels. One level is the sole use of FLC to monitor and control the inter-electrode gap, as well as provide overall system control. The other level is to use an alternative method to control the gap with FLC being used to provide overall system decision and control action. FLC provides the ECM controller with decision-making ‘intelligence’. The question is whether FLC can be used to effectively control the inter-electrode gap? This article finds that it can be used to prevent short circuit situations from arising, but if the outcome of future work means that the surface finish will be compromised then this will make FLC unattractive as a gap control method. If this work is transferred to EMM, where the possibilities of sparking are heightened then the fuzzy logic controller may be a ‘double edged sword’, in that it would prevent sparking from occurring but the surface finish may be compromised due to the potentially varying tool feed rates. If future work proves FLC to be inappropriate for inter-electrode gap control in ECM/EMM, then some form of hybrid controller would be the next phase of investigation. FLC can be combined with another more precise method of inter-electrode gap control to form a hybrid controller, a controller that incorporates the best method of inter-electrode gap control with the ability to make overall process, ‘intelligent’ human like decisions.
7. Conclusions

FLC was successful integrated into the University of Manchester ECM drilling rig, using a look-up table method. Although it is acknowledged by the authors that it is not the most robust method, it is deemed acceptable due to the notion of FLC of ECM being feasibly assessed. The critical test performed resulted in the fuzzy logic controller showing encouraging control performance. On three occasions the rig was forced into an artificially created short circuit situation. The fuzzy logic function of the controller was then turned on and in all three cases it brought the system back to optimum process conditions. This in itself was an encouraging result as it suggests that the application of FLC to ECM has potential. The encouraging result was that the fuzzy logic controller showed signs of maintaining the inter-electrode gap and stopped any occurrences of sparking. What is concluded is that FLC is shown to automate the ECM process, eliciting human knowledge and integrating it into the ECM controller to give it ‘intelligence’. There is potential in FLC for the maintenance of process conditions within optimum ranges, and thus the potential for better machining performance.

Further work needs to be done to establish what role FLC should take within the ECM controller, as related to the above discussion. Further work will also look into fine-tuning the FIS MFs in order to achieve the desired results. If FLC is found to be an acceptable inter-electrode gap control method, then a general fuzzy logic controller for ECM and EMM machines can be created and refined. If FLC gives undesirable results compared to other methods of inter-electrode gap control, then some form of hybrid controller is proposed as a possible future for ECM/EMM process control. A hybrid controller would combine another method of inter-electrode gap control into an overall fuzzy logic system controller, which would still enable the ECM controller to exhibit overall system and process ‘intelligence’. Once a fuzzy logic controller ‘type’ has been identified, work into FLC of inter-electrode gap control for ECM/EMM will take centre stage. The FIS presented in this article represents the first steps taken to incorporate FLC into ECM. The FIS that has been constructed is specific to one tool and thus the universe of discourse for each fuzzy set is based upon this tool. If this tool were to be changed then a new FIS would have to be built manually by a fuzzy logic programmer. Future work on the FIS could be in the area of adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) (Jang, Sun, & Mizutani, 1997). ANFIS allows the fuzzy logic controller to learn from the data it is modelling and automatically produce MF that best model the data.

1

    This paper is an extended version of a conference paper (Keasberry, Labib, Atkinson, & Frost 2004). It will present in greater detail the results, discussions and conclusions of the research.

2

    For interpretation of the references in colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.