Patients with Autism Spectrum Disorders ( ASD ) show symptoms that in general fall into three areas : ( 1 ) social impairment ; ( 2 ) communication difficulties ; and , ( 3 ) repetitive and stereotyped behaviors .
This paper presents a method and an infrastructure for the detection of the stereotyped motion disorders of patients with ASD .
The method adopts Artificial Intelligence techniques for the identification of stereotyped motion disorders and the Situation-Awareness paradigm for the reduction of misclassifications and the extraction of further information useful for clinicians .
Signals caught by accelerometers are pre-processed to obtain features that , in turn , are passed to the classifier that classifies the current temporal frame in order to detect stereotyped motions .
Once a stereotyped motion is detected , events are generated for intelligent situation-aware components , which collect information related to the frequency and period of the day of the disorders , and help also to reduce false positives and misclassifications by verifying spatio-temporal constraints .
Quantitatively , the off-line classifier has shown an accuracy of over 99 % ; whereas the on-line classifier has an accuracy of 92 % .
The research activity has been conducted in cooperation with clinicians of the Department of Child Psychiatry at the Children ’ s Hospital Santobono-Pausilipon in Naples , a prototype is deployed and tested at the hospital .
The Autism Spectrum Disorders ( ASD ) is a group of variable neurodevelopmental disorders that first arise during childhood , and generally follow a fixed progress without remission .
Manifest symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months , become established by an age of two or three years and tend to continue through childhood and adulthood .
They are distinguished not by a single symptom but by a characteristic triad of symptoms : impairments in social interaction ; impairments in communication ; and restricted interests and repetitive behavior ( Filipek et al. , 1999 ) .
Thirty years ago autism was considered to be a rare childhood disorder most often associated with severe intellectual disabilities , a lack of social awareness and the absence of meaningful expressive language ( Lotter , 1967 ) .
Today , the spectrum of autism disorders is now recognized as a set of common developmental disorders , with an estimated prevalence of , for example , about in every 110 children in the U.S. ( Autism , 2006 ) .
The symptoms of ASD vary from one child to the next , but in general , they fall into three areas : ( 1 ) social impairment ; ( 2 ) communication difficulties ; and , ( 3 ) repetitive and stereotyped behaviors .
Autistic individuals show many forms of stereotyped behaviors which the Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised ( RBS-R ) Lam and Aman ( 2007 ) classifies in several categories , one of which being stereotyped movements such as hand flapping , head rolling , or body rocking .
This paper presents a method for the detection of the stereotyped motion disorders and it focuses on the automatic recognition of repetitive and stereotyped behaviors , with a specific emphasis on those that are symptoms of a status of anxiety or of isolation from the surrounding environment .
The proposed system uses 3D-axis accelerometer data , whose waveforms , in the case of motion disorders , show clearly identifiable patterns .
The method adopts Artificial Intelligence techniques for the detection of motions disorders , thus , a specifically designed Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) classifies the temporal frames of patient gestures against such patterns and generates an event whenever a temporal frame is classified as a disorder .
Such events are then processed by situation-aware intelligent agents with the aim both of obtaining temporal information useful for clinicians and of reducing misclassifications .
The information purged of the misclassifications helps the clinicians to automatically collect reports useful for the tracking of the patient ’ s history of gestures and anomalous behaviors as well .
The off-line classifier has shown an accuracy of over 99 % ; the on-line an accuracy of 92 % .
The system is currently deployed at the Department of Child Psychiatry at the Children ’ s Hospital Santobono-Pausilipon in Naples , in order to validate it against a variety of patients .
Human behavior understanding Understanding the nature of human activities is in itself a significant research question for many disciplinary traditions , such as psychology , sociology , and ergonomics .
The variety of different perspectives creates problems , since each discipline may exploit different tactics to uncover the nature of human action .
Understanding how to represent human achieving activities for the purpose of intelligent environments draws upon these different traditions , and represents a significant multidisciplinary challenge ( Chalmers et al. , 2006 ) .
The need to understand human behavior arose in video surveillance with the aim of detecting crimes .
In video surveillance , the analysis is performed in two steps : the segmentation and tracking of human beings in video sequences , and the recognition and understanding of human behavior ( Xu , Tang , Liu , & Zhang , 2010 ) .
Concerning the understanding of human behavior , two kinds of approach are available : template matching , which aims to extract motion features from the given image sequence and to match such features with predefined activity patterns , and state space that aims to formulate statistical models to recognize several human behaviors .
Many research efforts to understand abnormal behavior have been made in the last few years .
Some approaches use an internal list of anomalous patterns against which the current behavior is compared .
The effectiveness of such approaches , however , is limited to the set of abnormal behaviors statically defined and does not scale to other unforeseen possible abnormal behaviors .
Other approaches inspired by the state space model are ( Xiang & Gong , 2008 ) and ( Loy , Xiang , & Gong , 2009 ) .
In such cases , all deviations from the normal state space are considered abnormal behaviors .
The major drawback of such approaches is the reduced ability to correctly classify anomalous activities and behaviors .
An emerging field of application for human behavior representation and recognition techniques is Ambient Intelligence ( Cook , Augusto , & Jakkula , 2009 ) .
Nater , Grabner , and Gool ( 2010 ) propose a data-driven hierarchical approach for the analysis ( by means of visual scenes ) of human actions in ambient assisted living scenarios .
In particular , the authors propose a novel representation and analysis approach , which relies on the learning of a model of normal human behavior in an unsupervised manner .
A publicly available action recognition dataset is adopted to determine the micro-actions and to identify actions .
This approach , however , focuses exclusively on human motion .
Indeed , no kind of interaction with objects within the environment is taken into account .
Moreover , anomalous behaviors are identified with deviations from the observed sequence of micro-actions ( body motions ) with respect to normal models .
In Monekosso and Remagnino ( 2010 ) , a model-based behavior analysis system for assisted living is proposed .
The monitoring of human behavior is achieved with unsupervised learning algorithms .
Behavior is defined as a recognizable pattern in a sequence of events or activities and is represented by means of Hidden Markov Models ( HMM ) .
The system is able to detect and classify human behavior against a predefined subset of normal behaviors .
Deviations from normal behaviors are classified as anomalies , but such a situation requires further investigation by a human in order to correctly establish the nature of the anomaly .
As far as stereotyped motion disorders are concerned , a few approaches based on template matching techniques have been proposed .
In Min and Tewfik ( 2010 ) , an approach based on Linear Predictive Coding is defined for the detection and characterization of behavioral patterns .
In Goncalves , Rodrigues , Costa , and Soares ( 2012 ) , the authors adopt the Microsoft Kinect device and gesture recognition algorithms to identify stereotyped motion disorders .
On one hand , this method does not require any wearable device for the monitored user ; on the other , motion disorders can be detected only when the user is located in a specific area opposite to the device .
Albinali , Goodwin , and Intille ( 2009 ) and Albinali , Goodwin , and Intille ( 2012 ) , have adopted wearable sensors and machine learning algorithms to identify the stereotyped motion disorders of children with autism .
They have focused on two motion disorders : hand flapping and body rocking .
As detailed later in this paper , our method differs from previous approaches because the results obtained by a classic classifier based on a machine learning algorithm ( i.e .
a neural network ) are successively processed by intelligent agents that reduce misclassifications and infer further clinical information .
Situation Awareness Situation-Awareness enhances the concept of the context ( Lee , Lunney , Curran , & Santos , 2009 ) by including rich temporal and other structural aspects : time of day , a situation may only happen at a particular time of the day ; duration , it may only last a certain length of time ; frequency , it may only happen a certain number of times per week ; and sequence , different situations may occur in a certain sequence ( Ye , Dobson , & McKeever , 2011 ) .
As suggested by Ye et al .
( 2011 ) , we should distinguish between Context and Situation-Awareness .
Indeed , the authors propose the following definitions : the Primary Context is the full set of data caught by real and virtual sensors ; the Secondary Context focuses on semantic information inferred and/or derived from the fusion of several data streams ( primary contexts ) an important kind of secondary context consisting in activities performed within the environment ; a situation is , instead , an abstract state of affairs of interest for designers and applications , which is derived from the context and a hypothesis about how the observed context relates to factors of interest .
In this paper we use the Artificial Neural Network to identify a piece of the secondary context , that related to special physical activities identified as motion disorders , and intelligent Prolog agents that exploit the Situation-Awareness paradigm to reason on temporal constraints in order to reduce misclassifications and obtain further information useful for the clinician .
The situation model has been described by using Situation Calculus ( SC ) .
The basic SC was designed by McCarthy ( 1963 ) and has been adopted to model dynamically changing worlds .
Three basic kinds of SC are : Actions , which can be performed in the world and can be quantified ; Fluents , that describe the state of the world ( these are predicates and functions whose value may change depending on the situation ) ; and Situations , which represent a history of action occurrences .
A dynamic world is modeled through a series of situations as a result of various actions being performed within the world .
The constant S0 denotes the initial situation ; whereas , do ( a , S ) indicates the situation resulting from the execution of the action a in situation S. The dynamic world is axiomatized mainly by adding initial world axioms , effect axioms , and successor state axioms ( Reiter , 2001 ) .
The initial world axioms describe the initial status of the environment , its objects , their position , their properties , etc .
An effect axiom , instead , describes the effect on a fluent caused by the execution of an action in a specific situation .
There must be specified for each fluent also the non-effect of the other actions .
Intuitively , it is possible to state that a fluent ’ s truth value is true after executing an action a if , and only if , the action has the effect of making the fluent true or , the fluent was already true before executing a and the action does not have the effect of making it false .
In such a case , a successor state axiom must be formalized .
Our approach requires that a basic action theory be defined to represent and reason on motion disorders .
As an example , a fluent such as isHandFlapping , may be defined of representing the situation related to the motion disorder hand flapping .
This takes place as long as the temporal frames under observations are classified by the ANN according to the pattern defined for such a kind of motion disorder .
It is important to note that , while the ANN classifies a series of temporal frames as different occurrences of the same motion disorder ( e.g .
Hand Flapping ) , the intelligent agent is able to recognize that such a sequence represents a unique occurrence of a motion disorder ; that is , a unique clinical event .
Another approach based on the Situation-Awareness mechanism has been adopted in Coronato , De Pietro , and Esposito ( 2006 ) to detect and handle abnormal behaviors in a monitored environment .
Succinctly , we have defined an approach and developed tools to support the process shown in Fig 1 .
A software component called a Data Acquirer collects primary context information from the patient by means of accelerometers .
After that , a Pre-processor extracts statistical features from the sampled signals .
The ANN Classifier classifies the temporal frames using statistical features and generates events for four abnormal statuses : Hand hitting against the Ear ( HE ) , Arm Flapping ( AF ) , Hand Rotation Up ( HRU ) and Hand Rotation Down ( HRD ) .
The ANN Classifier provides secondary context information by means of such events that indicate time-by-time the current gesture .
Recognizing correctly each anomalous status is the main feature of our system in order to provide clinicians with accurate daily reports about all the anomalous statues performed by the patients , as well as information such as frequency and duration which is useful for monitoring their behaviors .
Such reports also help clinicians to understand the patient ’ s progress by highlighting and noting any changes in their behaviors since the start of their treatment .
From this point of view false positives or misclassification errors are significant problems because they involve uncorrected reports which show a possible anomalous status which in fact never happened .
Unfortunately , we have experimentally verified the occurrence of different kinds of problem with the sequences of events generated by the ANN Classifier .
The most frequent are : • M1 – spurious misclassifications , that are false positives related to one singular temporal frame misclassified as an abnormal status when the gesture is normal ; • M2 – misclassifications between Hand Rotation Up and Hand Rotation Down which are gestures with similar statistical features ; • M3 – misclassifications due to short pauses in the motion of the patient .
Indeed , in the case of a short pause during the abnormal gesture , a regular classifier such as the ANN Classifier or others presented in the related work would treat this as two distinct disorders , but from a clinical point of view it is related to the same event .
Workflow of the recognition process Fig 1 .
Workflow of the recognition process .
The Situation-Awareness paradigm may be useful in reducing such misclassifications giving the possibility of expressing and verifying spatio-temporal constraints on the sequence of actions ( events ) .
Therefore , we have defined and realized two subsystems called the Real-Time Advanced Classifier ( RTAC ) and the Near Real-Time Advanced Classifier ( NRTAC ) .
It is worth clarifying that by real-time classifier we mean the system that is able to filter spurious events ( M1 ) and that introduces the minimum delay in the detection .
This subsystem is required to provide the earliest detection of abnormal behaviors , whatever they are .
The NRTAC , instead , is required to provide the most correct and precise clinical information for the illness assessment ; thus , it must be able to correct errors related to spurious misclassifications ( M1 ) , cases of misclassifications between HRU and HRD ( M2 ) and short motion pause ( M3 ) although this requires reasoning on a longer sequence of events generated by the ANN Classifier and then causes a slightly longer delay in the classification process .
In addition to this , we have assigned to the NRTAC subsystem the responsibility of providing further clinical information about the duration of the motion disorder ( Duration Agent ) and its frequency in different periods of the day ( periodOfDay Agent ) .
Data acquisition In order to acquire motion data , we apply an eZ430-Chronos accelerometer ( Fig 2 ) to the patient ’ s wrist .
The eZ430-Chronos is an integrated , wireless development system that provides a complete reference design for developers creating wireless smart watch , personal displays for personal area networks , wireless sensor nodes for remote data collection and other applications .
It includes an integrated pressure sensor and a 3D-axis accelerometer for motion sensitive control .
The device also offers temperature and battery voltage measurements ( estimated battery life ranging from 2 days up to several months depending on the operating mode ) and is complete with a USB-based CC1111 wireless interface to a PC ( wireless range up to 10 m ) .
Such a device comes with a DLL control driver ; although in fact , we used the RXTX library ( Rxtx library ) .
RXTX is a native library providing serial and parallel communication for the Java Development Toolkit ( JDK ) .
eZ430-Chronos accelerometer Fig 2. eZ430-Chronos accelerometer .
In order to better highlight the repetitive trend of anomalous gestures , we plot 3-D ( X , Y , Z ) values extracted from the accelerometer sensors at the same time as the anomalous gesture is taking place .
The 3-D values are plotted in a X–Y graphic where on the horizontal axis ( X-axis ) the time t ( seconds ) is recorded and on the vertical axis ( Y-axis ) is recorded the value of ( X , Y , Z ) .
The values measured with the accelerometer as shown in Figs .
3 and 6 ( a ) , are the accelerations along the 3 axes ( x , y , z ) in the range of [ −2g , +2g ] .
These values were coded in integer values in the range [ −2500 , +2500 ] to allow us to apply the proposed statistical features for the gesture detection .
( a ) Hand Against Ears wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot Fig 3 .
( a ) Hand Against Ears wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot .
Due to the technological limit fixed by our own hardware we could not measure other values such as velocity and position .
The blue line is the Y-value , the red line is the Z-value and the green line is the X-value .
As demonstrated in Figs .
3–6 ( a ) , in the case of motion disorders , signals show distinctive statistical features and repetitive patterns .
It is clear , indeed , how the repetitiveness of the waveform grants specific peculiarities from a statistical point of view , in terms of high frequency , zero crossing , etc .
Such examples represent the patterns of the motion disorders .
( a ) Hand flapping wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot Fig 4 .
( a ) Hand flapping wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot .
( a ) Hand Rotation Down wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot Fig 5 .
( a ) Hand Rotation Down wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot .
( a ) Hand Rotation Up wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot Fig 6 .
( a ) Hand Rotation Up wave form and ( b ) gesture screen-shoot .
In Figs .
3 and 6 ( b ) , a screen-shoot of the motion patterns of each gesture is shown in order to help the reader to understand better both the monitored gesture and the procedure described in the text .
The sensor has been circled in order to highlight its position on the patient ’ s body .
It is worth to note that although the screen-shoots show the gestures mimicked with the right hand , all the gestures can be performed with both hands .
The system works in both cases .
Feature extraction The signals are pre-processed in order to extract statistical features useful for classification .
We decided to adopt this approach because it is widely used for the detection of human motions .
The literature proposes some works which prove the effectiveness of the method ( Borges , 2013 ) , Chen , AlRegib , & Juang , 2013 .
We also used statistical features such as the average and the variance to compare different kinds of Artificial Intelligence algorithms in order to select the ones most compliant with our needs .
In particular , the following features are calculated : • The Mean Absolute Value ( MAS ) , which is obtained from the average of the absolute value of each signal .
• The Root Mean Square ( RMS ) , also known as the quadratic mean , which is a statistical measure of the magnitude of a varying quantity .
• The Variance ( VAR ) , which is a measure of how far a set of numbers is spread out .
It is one of several descriptors of a probability distribution , describing how far the numbers lie from the mean ( expected value ) .
• The Standard Deviation ( SD ) , which shows how much variation or dispersion exists from the average ( mean , or expected value ) .
A low standard deviation indicates that the data points tend to be very close to the mean , whereas a high standard deviation indicates that the data points are spread out over a large range of values .
• The Waveform Length ( WL ) , which is the cumulative length of the waveform over the time fragment .
The WL is related to the waveform amplitude , frequency and time • The Zero Crossing ( WZC ) , which is the number of times that the amplitude value of the signal crosses the zero y-axis .
All these features are computed for each ( X , Y , and Z ) signal .
In addition to this , we also computed the covariance among such signals , which , however , has not proved to be relevant for classification .
Further information on the statistical feature extraction may be found in Guyon , Gunn , Nikravesh , and Zadeh ( 2006 ) .
ANN Classifier The next step after the features extraction was to evaluate which Artificial Intelligence algorithms was most suitable for our purposes .
In our previous work we performed tests of different classic classical Artificial Intelligence algorithms in order to evaluate their performance with our own ground truth .
It is worth explaining how we defined the ground truth for the training and testing .
To do that , an expert clinician mimicked one-by-one the four anomalous gestures that we recognize .
For each gesture we defined a data-set used for the training .
In this section we introduce two concepts , the off-line classification and the on-line classification the difference between the two being that the off-line classification performed the classification by taking the gesture movement data from the sensors placed on the wrist of the author who had mimicked the gestures , whereas the on-line classification took the data from the sensors placed on a patient ’ s wrist during a medical examination .
In order to identify motion disorders , we evaluated three classifiers based on Artificial Intelligence algorithms : Neural Networks , Naive Bayes and Bayesian Networks .
We focused our attention on these three technologies because they have been used successfully in previous works on ambient intelligence ( Lin , Wang , & Lin , 2008 ) , ( Mozer , 1998 ) , Osborne , Roberts , Rogers , & Jennings , 2012 .
Experimental results have shown better classification performances for the neural network , whereas the other classifiers show a faster training .
For more information about the results , the experiments , etc .
we suggest reading the following work ( Coronato & G. D. , 2012 ) .
The Table 1 shows the performance of the three methods in terms of accuracy and error .
The three methods were trained with the same training data-set with a size equal to 705 temporal frames .
As we can see , the NN shows the better classification with an error less than 1 % .
For this reason we decided to adopt the NN for the classification of the gestures , although it showed a training process slower than the other methods .
Table 1 .
Performance comparison of the three methods .
Neural network Bayesian networks Naive Bayes Accuracy 99.127 % 97.3 % 98.15 % Error 0.873 % 2.7 % 1.85 % The reader can note that all the methods show very good results over 95 % .
This is due both to a strong statistical characterization of the anomalous gestures and to the fact that the evaluation was performed using a sub-set of the training dataset ( 20 % of whole ) .
Due to the need for accuracy in the classification process in order to avoid misclassification errors and false positives , we chose to adopt the neural network approach in preference to the others , taking into consideration the performance results obtained in the laboratory .
Cross validation was performed with two values of the K-Fold ( Stone , 1974 ) .
The off-line experiments allowed us to choose the best Artificial Intelligence algorithm for our purposes and to discover the occurrence of the misclassification errors ( M1 , M2 , M3 ) .
Based on the off-line results , we realized an on-line classifier using WEKA libraries ( Holmes , Donkin , & Witten , 1994 ) .
The training of the on-line classifier followed the same process as the off-line one .
At first , the anomalous gestures were mimicked in order to acquire raw data from the sensor ; these mimicked gestures were performed by a clinician who is an expert about the motion disorders associated to autism .
This step produced thousands of raw data samples in the form of ( day-time , x-axis , y-axis , z-axis ) .
Next , we aggregated the raw data samples in temporal frames each of which lasted two seconds .
The statistical features described in the paper were extracted frame-by-frame .
The result of this step is a tuple like this ( MAXx , MASy , MASz , RMSx , RMSy , RMSz , VARx , VARy , VARz , SDx , SDy , SDz , WLx , WLy , WLz , WZCx , WZCy , WZCz ) .
All tuples were labeled as AF , HE , HRU , HRD , NORM according to the anomalous stereotyped gestures presented in Section 4.3 .
All tuples define the training dataset of the on-line classifier with a total size of 705 occurrences .
For the classification we set the software module that acquires data from the sensors to collect 32 samples per second and considered temporal frames of two seconds for the classification , with one second of overlap frame-by-frame .
Each second the classifier produces one event of one of the following types : • AF – ( repeated ) Arm Flapping ; • HE – ( repeated ) Hand against Ear ; • HRU – ( repeated ) Hand Rotation Up ; • HRD – ( repeated ) Hand Rotation Down ; • NORM – a Normal gesture In order to evaluate the performance of the neural network we performed an experiment in our lab .
Table 1 reports the performance and accuracy of the neural network ; such results were achieved during off-line experiments by monitoring one of the authors who performed both normal ( NORM ) and anomalous gestures ( ANOM ) .
In particular , it is possible to see that the neural network reports seven false negatives and two false positives out of one thousand samples .
The resulting accuracy is over 99 % .
This result supports the choice of the neural network .
The entire designing process of the ANN network was made using the KNIME tool ( Silipo & Mazanetz , 2012 ) , an open frame-work for the analysis process , data transformation and reporting ; the Fig 8 shows the ANN parameters .
It is worth note that the parameter HiddenLayers set to a means that the number of hidden layers is , tributes is 18 ( RMSx , RMSy , etc . )
and the number of classes is 5 ( NORM , HRU , HRD , AF , HE ) , the Fig 7 shows the ANN ’ s structure .
The other parameters such as LearningRate , Momentum were used to calibrate the BackPropagation algorithm for the training of the neural network ( Riedmiller & Braun , 1993 ) .
ANN networks Fig 7 .
ANN networks .
ANN parameters Fig 8 .
ANN parameters .
The reason for the choice of SC over other methods of planning such as the Planning Domain Definition Language ( PDDL ) McDermott , 1998 lies in the consideration that SC is an event-driven model for reasoning over a sequence of events .
This feature is suitable for the sequence of events provided by the ANN .
The sequence of events is used to model changes in patient behaviors and recognize motion disorders ; in SC such changes are described in terms of fluents and properties whereas in PDDL and other methods of planning , they are described in terms of the effects of the events themselves , an approach more complex than SC ( Eyerich , Nebel , Lakemeyer , & Classen , 2006 ) .
As said before , we have defined two sub-systems , RTAC and NRTAC , which both model changes in patient behaviors and reduce the misclassifications errors .
The first one works as fast as possible without providing any kind of temporal information , while the latter , NRTAC , also provides temporal information such as duration and period of day .
However , NRTAC recognizes the anomalous gestures slower than RTAC .
We would remind the reader that we define such agents in order to remove the misclassification errors ( M1 , M2 , M3 ) that we have experimentally verified with the ANN .
In this section , we describe the intelligent agents which the RTAC and the NRTAC components include .
The specifics of each agent is implemented using SC formalism .
The input of both components is the sequence of events generated by the ANN by classifying the patient ’ s movements .
Each event of the sequence is sent to the agents which reason according to their specifics in SC .
Primitive actions As introduce before , our agents reason over a sequence of events generated by the ANN so first we have to define such kinds of events in SC formalism first .
Axiom 1 introduces the set of actions ( events ) of interest .
Among such actions , resetCount and updateGesture are endogenous and are executed for technical reasons ( i.e .
to reset a counter and update the total duration of the motion disorder ) .
The others ( HE , AF , HRD , HRU , and NORM ) are those performed by the patient and detected by the ANN Classifier as motion disorders ; the names are the acronyms of the type of motion disorder .
( 1 ) where the t variable means the time of the occurrence of the event .
Fluents and situation-independent predicates In this subsection we describe the specifics of the agents to model the changes in the patient ’ s behaviors and the anomalous gestures .
It is possible to define the periods of the day of interest by means of a predicate such as the one formalized by functional axiom 2 .
In this case , we have defined three periods : morning , afternoon , and evening with actual values , the variables which define them being : tS and tF two thresholds that define a temporal window for classifying periods of the day and p , a variable that returns the period of day according to the temporal window .
( 2 ) For the sake of brevity , we report only a subset of the situation-dependent fluents including those for the HRU disorder .
However , it is quite easy to figure out that similar fluents have been defined also for the other disorders .
( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) The variable S , that is common to all the fluents , describes the current situation , the p variable of the functional fluent isGesture ( S ) describes the period of day within which the patient performs an anomalous gesture , while the d variable of HRUDuration ( S ) describes the duration time of the anomalous gesture .
A specification of successor state axioms for some of the previous fluents is now presented , which allows us to explain the functioning of some mechanisms .
In particular , let ’ s suppose that the ANN Classifier generates the sequence of events { NORM , NORM , HRU , HRU , HRU , HRU , NORM , NORM } , which corresponds to a motion disorder of type HRU and a duration of four seconds .
In this case , both fluents isHRU and isGestureHRU change their truth values to true .
Both isGestureHRU and isHRU are relation fluents so they return Boolean values , the difference between them being the following : the first fluent triggers whenever an event such as an HRU is generated from the ANN so that for each coming HRU event , its value is true whereas at the first occurrence of a non-HRU event ( e.g .
a NORM event or a pause between two HRU events ) , its value changes to false .
It basically maps one-by-one the occurrence of each HRU event generated by the ANN in an agents ’ s truth values ; isHRU triggers when a sequence of HRU events is recognized instead of one event at time so it is also able to filter spurious misclassifications which isGestureHRU can not do .
However , the fluent isHRU keeps the value true until the first event not equal to an HRU and indicates a situation of motion disorder HRU that is taking place .
The fluent HRUDuration , instead , computes the duration of the current HRU disorder .
( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) In addition to this , let ’ s now consider the following sequence : { NORM , NORM , HRU , HRU , HRU , HRU , NORM , HRU , HRU , NORM , NORM , NORM } , which corresponds to an HRU disorder with a short interruption in the middle .
In this case , the prolog agent computes two different clinical events related to the two subsequences .
From the clinicians point of view , this is an error because two or more sequences with a short pause in the middle should be consider as a single clinical event ( M3 ) .
To avoid this misclassification , we have modified the fluent isHRU to let it check a temporal constraint between two or more consecutive HRU disorders .
In particular , if the temporal distance is less than a certain threshold , the two sequences are considered part of the same clinical event .
( 11 ) The Agents have been realized within ECLiPSe , an environment for the development and deployment of the high-level modeling and control programming of Prolog agents .
Interactions between the Java-based ANN Classifier and Prolog agents have been realized by means of the Java-Eclipse ( JE ) interface .
JE is a set of API embedded in the ECLiPSe kernel library for the Java Development Toolkit , which provides methods for the iteration with the agents .
In order to explain how the agents are used and how they can be helpful for clinicians , we provide a case study scenario as shown in Fig 9 .
A sequence of AF events is generated by the neural network , which means that an anomalous gesture is occurring .
The short pause in the middle of the sequence , the red event NORM , causes the neural network to perform a misclassification because two distinct anomalous gestures ( G1 and G2 ) are recognized instead of a single clinical event ( an anomalous behavior ) .
This kind of misclassification is avoided by submitting the sequence to the Prolog agents .
The isAF agent detects only one gesture , the AFDuration agent returns the duration time ( ΔT = 15 s ) , and the PeriodOfDay agent returns the period of day in which the gesture happens .
Each AF event is sent to the agents which change their truth values according to their specifics .
When the sequence finishes an opportune report about the anomalous gesture is generated and made available to clinicians .
Use case scenario Fig 9 .
Use case scenario .
A prototype of this system is currently deployed in a hospital setting ; clinicians have made available a living room at the hospital with a workstation that hosts all the components of the system such as the database and agents , etc .
Currently the system is able to capture the data stream from one patient at a time so clinicians and caregivers make daily observations of one child at a time .
Whenever a medical examination finishes , the accelerometer is removed from the child ’ s wrist and the report about the observation is saved for future consultations .
If a new observation begins , clinicians will place a sensor on the patient ’ s wrist and re-start the system .
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the ANN Classifier , we performed an experiment involving one patient .
Table 2 , reports the performance of the on-line ANN Classifier over more than 700 temporal frames classified .
Table 2 .
Off-line performance and accuracy of the neural network .
NORM ANOM Off-line confusion matrix NORM 879 2 ANOM 7 143 Off-line results Accuracy 99.127 % Error 0.873 % Wrong classified 9 The data belong to the patient who performed the anomalous gestures during a daily observation .
In detail , we had 11 false positives and two other misclassifications out of 705 temporal frames .
It is important to note that such a result is related to the on-line classifier that which has been trained with gestures mimicked by clinicians .
In the hospital setting we have observed for the on-line ANN Classifier a worse performance , of course , with an accuracy near to 92 % ( see Table 3 ) .
This result has been obtained by the ANN Classifier matching real patient ’ s gestures with patterns of motion disorders mimicked by clinicians .
We are now collecting data from other real patients , which are continuously being validated by clinicians , in order to build a larger training data-set that will improve the performance of the online ANN Classifier .
In addition to this , however , it is important to report the corrections and other clinical in-formation due to the intelligent agents ( RTAC and NRTAC ) .
Table 3 .
On-line performance and accuracy of the neural network .
AF HRD HRU HE NORM On-line confusion matrix AF 15 0 0 0 0 HRD 0 8 0 1 0 HRU 0 0 16 0 0 HE 0 0 1 9 0 NORM 7 1 1 2 644 On-line results Accuracy 92.156 % Error 7.844 % Wrong classified 13 In order to evaluate the performance of the agents we performed a second experiment .
Tables 4 and 5 , indeed , reports the results of the monitoring in the hospital of four different patients in four daily observations .
The intelligent Prolog agents have identified two motion disorders of type HE for one patient ( Table 4 ) and two of type HE and AF , respectively , for another patient ( Fig 5 ) .
The other patients did not show any motion disorders during the observation .
Let us focus on the disorder of type AF .
This was the result of a sequence of seven temporal frames classified as AF by the Artificial Neural Network .
The disorder lasted for seven seconds .
It is finally useful to note that the ANN Classifier detected one spurious event classified as an HDR for the first patient .
Such a misclassification was purged by the Advanced Classifiers .
Table 4 .
Results of four daily observation – Patient A. ANN Classifier Advanced Classifier Day Morning Afternoon Evening N N Δ N Δ N Δ N Δ HE 15 2 15 s 2 15 s 0 0 0 0 HRU 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 HRD 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 AF 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Table 5 .
Results of four daily observation – Patient B. ANN Classifier Advanced Classifier Day Morning Afternoon Evening N N Δ N Δ N Δ N Δ HE 9 1 9 s 0 0 1 9 s 0 0 HRU 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 HRD 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 AF 7 1 7 s 0 0 1 7 s 0 0
In this paper we have presented an approach to detect stereotyped motion disorders in children with Autism Spectrum Disorders .
We have adopted a template matching technique and compared the performance of different classifiers .
Artificial Neural Networks have shown a slightly better performance during off-line motion disorder recognition .
We have realized an on-line recognition system , which classifies temporal frames against four types of motion disorders .
Such classification results have been next processed by intelligent Prolog agents that are responsible for ( i ) identifying episodes of motion disorders ; ( ii ) constructing temporal statistics and other information useful for the clinician ; and ( iii ) reducing misclassifications by applying temporal constraints , the results show as the Agents remove misclassification errors and improve the quality of the detection .
The preliminary laboratory results have encouraged the adoption of such an approach in real case studies .
For this reason , we have deployed the monitoring system at the Department of Child Neuropsychiatry at the Santobono-Pausillipon Children ’ s Hospital , where we are collecting data from a large set of patients .
The final objective , however , is to realize a full context-aware environment ( Coronato et al. , 2006 ) , which should be able to detect patient ’ s anomalous behaviors and their causes ( e.g .
actions performed within the environment by the patient or other users ) .