Recent advances in the field of artificial intelligence have led to the emergence of expert systems for medical applications .
Moreover , in the last few decades computational tools have been designed to improve the experiences and abilities of physicians for making decisions about their patients .
Breast cancer is the commonest cancer in women and is the second leading cause of cancer death ( Jemal et al. , 2003 ) .
Although it is curable when detected early , about one third of women with breast cancer die of the disease ( Scheidhauer , Walter , & Seemann , 2004 ) .
In this study , we have developed an expert system that we called as an Ex-DBC ( Expert system for Diagnosis of Breast Cancer ) , because differentiating between benign and malignant mammographic findings , however , is quite difficult .
Only 15–30 % of biopsies performed on nonpalpable but mammographically suspicious lesions prove malignant ( Hall , Storella , Silverstone , & Wyshak , 1988 ) .
The golden standard for diagnosis of breast cancer is biopsy .
But , biopsy can be a source of patient discomfort , bleeding and infection , and can burden the health care system with extra costs .
Thus , to reduce unnecessary biopsy rate have acquired big importance .
The fuzzy rules which will be use in inference engine of Ex-DBC system were found by using neuro-fuzzy method .
Ex-DBC can be used as a strong diagnostic tool with 97 % specificity , 76 % sensitivity , 96 % positive and 81 % negative predictive values for diagnosing of breast cancer .
That the developed system ’ s positive predictive is high is very important .
By means of this system can be prevented unnecessary biopsy .
Beside it can be benefited from this system for training of students in medicine .
Among women , the three most commonly diagnosed cancers will be cancers of the breast , lung and bronchus , and colon and rectum .
Cancers occurring at these sites are expected to account for about 55 percent of new cancer cases .
Breast cancer alone is expected to account for 32 percent ( 211,300 ) of all new cancer cases among women in 2003 ( Jemal et al. , 2003 ) .
About one-third of women with breast cancer die of the disease , although it is curable when detected early ( Scheidhauer , Walter , & Seemann , 2004 ) .
Breast cancers in early stages unfortunately produce no symptoms when the tumor is still small and hence well treatable .
Therefore , it is difficult but at the same time important to detect breast cancers at an early stage .
Both randomized trials and population-based evaluations of screening mammography have shown that early detection of breast cancer through mammography greatly improves the chances of survival ( Humphrey , Helfand , Chan , & Woolf , 2002 ; Tabar et al. , 2001 ) .
Mammography can identify cancer several years before physical symptoms are produced and therefore it is recognized as the most effective breast cancer screening method available today .
However , about 5–10 % of the mammography results are interpreted as abnormal or inconclusive until further examinations like ultrasound imaging or breast biopsy lead to a final interpretation of normal or benign breast tissue .
It is reported that only 10–30 % of all breast biopsies actually show a malignant pathology ( Kopans , 1992 ) .
The high number of unnecessary breast biopsies causes major mental and physical discomfort for the patients as well as unnecessary expenses spent for examinations .
So , it is necessary to develop successful identification method to recognize the breast cancer .
Statistical techniques and artificial intelligence techniques have been used to predict the breast cancer by several researchers ( Kovalerchuck , Triantaphyllou , Ruiz , & Clayton , 1997 ; Pendharkar , Rodger , Yaverbaum , Herman , & Benner , 1999 ) .
The objective of these identification techniques is to assign patients to either a benign group that does not have breast cancer or a ‘ malignant ’ group who has strong evidence of having breast cancer .
So , breast cancer diagnostic problems are more general and widely discussed classification problem ( Anderson , 1984 ; Dillon & Goldstein , 1984 ; Hand , 1981 ; Johnson & Wichern , 2002 ) .
Motivated by the need of a strong diagnostic tool for breast cancer , in this study , we developed an expert system Ex-DBC to efficiently diagnose the breast cancer .
The developed system uses fuzzy rules for diagnosis .
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows .
The following second section gives the necessary background information about data set for breast cancer , used neuro-fuzzy method and expert system .
The third section is reserved for explanation of the developed CDDS system Ex-DBC and its components .
The fourth section contains issue of diagnostic power of Ex-DBC system .
The last section is discussion and conclusion for this study .
Mammographic mass data set For this study , the mammography mass data set is provided from UCI Machine Learning Repository .
This data set can be used to predict the severity ( benign or malignant ) of a mammographic mass lesion from BI-RADS attributes and the patient ’ s age .
It contains a BI-RADS assessment , the patient ’ s age and three BI-RADS attributes together with the ground truth ( the severity field ) for 516 benign and 445 malignant masses that have been identified on full field digital mammograms collected at the Institute of Radiology of the University Erlangen-Nuremberg between 2003 and 2006 .
Each instance has associated BI-RADS assessment ranging from 1 ( definitely benign ) to 5 ( highly suggestive of malignancy ) assigned in a double-review process by physicians .
Assuming that all cases with BI-RADS assessments greater or equal a given value ( varying from 1 to 5 ) , are malignant and the other cases benign , sensitivities and associated specificities can be calculated .
Names and codes of attributes of this data set were given in Table 1 .
Table 1 .
Attributes of mammographic mass data .
Attribute information BI-RADS BI-RADS assessment : 1–5 ( ordinal ) Age Age : patient ’ s age in years ( integer ) Shape Shape : mass shape : round = 1 , oval = 2 , lobular = 3 , irregular = 4 ( nominal ) Margin Margin : mass margin : circumscribed = 1 , microlobulated = 2 , obscured = 3 , ill-defined = 4 , spiculated = 5 ( nominal ) Density Density : mass density high = 1 , iso = 2 , low = 3 , fat-containing = 4 ( ordinal ) Class Severity : benign = 01 or malignant = 10 2.2 .
Expert system and neuro-fuzzy method An expert system is a computer system which simulates the knowledge and expertise of a human expert .
An expert system ; • has a large database of knowledge ; • allows the database to be interrogated ; • has a set of rules ( inference engine ) for making deductions .
For example , in Medicine , expert systems are being used for disease diagnosis .
The patient ’ s details and symptoms are input , and the system outputs probable diagnoses , recommended treatments or drugs which may be prescribed .
The advantages of an expert system for doctors ; • A large database of knowledge can be added to and kept up-to-date
• The system can not ’ forget ’ or get facts wrong .
• It survives forever .
There is no loss of knowledge as there is when a doctor retires .
• The computer can access specialist knowledge that a doctor may not have .
In this study , an expert system has been developed which has fuzzy rules obtained by neuro-fuzzy method .
Neuro-fuzzy method uses a heuristic learning algorithm whose high performance has been proved in medical diagnosis and classifications ( Keles , Haşıloğlı , Keles , & Aksoy , 2007 ; Keles & Keles , 2008 ; Nauck , 2003 ) .
Thus , Ex-DBC system has a strong inference engine containing fuzzy rules that can detect hidden relations in the case unrecognized by the human expert .
Ex-DBC could diagnose with 96 % positive and 81 % negative predictive values for breast cancer .
The neuro-fuzzy system has a 3-layer feed-forward architecture that is derived from a generic fuzzy perception ( Nauck , Klawonn , & Kruse , 1997 ) .
The units in this network use t-norms or t-conorms as activation functions .
The hidden layer represents fuzzy rules .
Fuzzy sets are encoded as ( fuzzy ) connection weights .
This view of a fuzzy system illustrates the data flow within the system ( data and error signals ) , and its parallel nature .
Neuro-fuzzy system as a special three layered feed-forward neural network where • the first layer represents the input variables that means the pattern tuples , • the hidden layer represents fuzzy rules , • the third layer represents the output variables that means one unit for every class , • the units use t-norms and t-conorms as activation functions , • the fuzzy sets are encoded as ( fuzzy ) connection weights .
We investigated best fuzzy model of classification for Mammographic Mass data set .
As a result , we obtained best rules to use in inference engine of Ex-DBC system .
The neuro-fuzzy model created for Ex-DBC ’ s inference engine The architecture of model used for this study is shown in Fig 1 .
The first layer contains three input units representing the pattern features .
The hidden layer holds rule units representing the fuzzy rules , and the third layer consists of two output units .
In this study , the hidden layer contains nine fuzzy rules using BI-RADS , Shape and Margin attributes , respectively : 1. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is very large and Margin is very large then Malign ; 2. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is very large and Margin is medium then Malign ; 3. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is large and Margin is small then Malign ; 4. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is large and Margin is medium then Malign ; 5. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is large and Margin is very large then Malign ; 6. if BI-RADS is very large and Shape is small then Malign ; 7. if BI-RADS is medium then Benign ; 8. if BI-RADS is small then Benign ; 9. if BI-RADS is large then Benign .
The neuro-fuzzy model created for Ex-DBC ’ s inference engine Fig 1 .
The neuro-fuzzy model created for Ex-DBC ’ s inference engine .
As this application is designed to be used by doctors , who are not advanced computer users , we aimed to develop the user interface of the breast cancer as user friendly .
The program has been implemented in Visual C # ( microsoft visual studio 2005 developer tool ) and SQL server 2005 was used as a database platform .
Ex-DBC runs on windows environment .
We constructed a database for Ex-DBC system in which the detailed information of each patient would be kept .
Patient number that is given to each patient for the differentiation , name and surname , medical values belongs to the patient , the doctor ’ s diagnosis field , the Ex-DBC ’ s diagnosis field and real diagnosis field is placed in database .
Fig 2 shows how Ex-DBC system and its inference engine were designed .
Besides , real malignant cell images were used on background of screens in this design .
The design of Ex-DBC system Fig 2 .
The design of Ex-DBC system .
Firstly , it is met with an entrance screen when Ex-DBC system runs .
User enters his/her own user name and password .
If the user has not been defined in the system or makes a wrong entrance then it does not allow access and gives a warning .
Some explanatory information related to the system appears on screen after entrance .
Later , process selection screen , main menu of Ex-DBC system is visible ( Fig 3 ) .
A lot of processes deal with data base , diagnose and education displays on this menu .
More a lot about these processes will be mentioned in followings .
Process selection screen Fig 3 .
Process selection screen .
There are seven processes on this menu : 1 .
Individually inquire .
Data base evaluation .
Data base and process .
Mammography processing .
Compare diagnosis .
User and authority .
User and password .
Each user can use processes inside him/her self authority defined by the system administrator .
For instance , when an unauthorized user tries to enter the Data Base and Process screen , the system warns user and does not allow any access .
Exit button on the menu screen closes all open processes in the system .
Individually inquire In this process , diagnosis of breast cancer could realized by entering only mammographic mass data belong to one patient without recording the patient ’ s information in database ( Fig 4 ) .
These data are BI-RADS , patient ’ s age , mass shape , mass margin , and mass density .
Individually inquire screen Fig 4 .
Individually inquire screen .
Data base evaluation Evaluation of diagnosis can be made for all patients recorded in Ex-DBC database .
Primarily , all patients who have been recorded in the system database can be attainable from this screen , When the diagnose button is pushed , the list of results for desired patients can be seen on the screen straightaway ( Fig 5 ) .
In addition , statistical information deals with batch evaluation such as number of benign and malign case and total case can be seen at the top of this screen .
Data base evaluation screen Fig 5 .
Data base evaluation screen .
Data base and process Only authorized user can use this process .
The list of entire patient is placed in the table at the bottom of the screen .
The user can select one of patients by clicking in the table and this patient ’ s information can be retrieved in above section .
In other words diagnosis and updating is attainable from this section .
Keeping the patient records , entrance of a new patient , searching for an already recorded patient or extracting a patient from the registration are some of the operations that leads to the construction of a database .
The user can perform all these operations by specially prepared this selection ( Fig 6 ) .
Data base and process screen Fig 6 .
Data base and process screen .
Mammography processing The entire patients are seen in the table at the bottom of this screen .
At the same time , the user can examine any patient ’ s mammography image by clicking related patient record .
The user can enlarge this image for numbers of times by pushing enlarge button ( Fig 7 ) .
In addition , if it is essential , the image can be opened with image processing program such as Photoshop and Macromedia Fireworks .
In this way , the user can one by one examine the mammography images comprehensively .
Mammography processing screen Fig 7 .
Mammography processing screen .
Compare diagnosis This process has been designed as education aimed in diagnosis breast cancer .
Randomly selected medical data belongs to each patient is showed here and Ex-DBC system wants user to diagnose all patient or patients selected by educator .
As a result Ex-DBC system compares user diagnosis with self diagnosis and real diagnosis if it is previously entered in system and this statistical evaluation is showed at the bottom of the screen .
Ex-DBC system structure is extremely user friendly as it is easy to navigate with its wizard-like interface ( Fig 8 ) .
Compare diagnosis screen Fig 8 .
Compare diagnosis screen .
User and authority Only the most authorized user can enter in here .
This user defines other user and their authorities .
Thanks to this process , existing authorities for users can be limited or completely deleted .
User and password All users can change own passwords by using this process .
Diagnosis is an essential step in medical care .
Usually this involves ‘ diagnostic tests ’ of some description .
A health check is also a group of diagnostic tests .
Decisions about medical treatment are made on the basis of test results .
These tests are sensitivity , specificity , positive and negative predictive values .
Diagnostic test results of Ex-DBC were given in this section .
Definitions Sensitivity : Sensitivity of a test is the percentage of all patients with disease present who have a positive test .
Specificity : Specificity of a test is the percentage of all patients without disease who have a negative test .
Predictive value : The predictive value of a test is a measure ( % ) of the times that the value ( positive or negative ) is the true value , i.e .
the percent of all positive tests that are true positives is the positive predictive value .
An ideal , or truly accurate , test will always give a positive result with disease , and a negative result without disease .
This is not the case for all tests .
In practice this means that not all positive test results will represent disease .
This is described by the positive predictive value ( PPV ) .
Equally , not all negative results will represent no disease .
This is described by the negative predictive value ( NPV ) .
The simple two-by-two table is one of the most intuitive methods for the analysis of diagnostic examinations ( Moskowitz , 1992 ) .
Despite this , the method is capable of displaying strength and power in illuminating understanding the performance and analysis of diagnostic examinations .
The basic idea of a diagnostic test interpretation is to calculate the probability a patient has a disease under consideration given a certain test result .
For this , a two-by-two table is used as a mnemonic device ( Langlotz , 2003 ) .
The table is labeled with the test results on the left side and the disease status on top as shown in Table 2 .
Table 2 .
The two-by-two table .
Test T ( Ex-DBC ) Disease present D+ Disease absent D− Total Test positive ( T+ ) True positives ( TP = 286 ) False positive ( FP = 12 ) 298 Test negative ( T− ) False negative ( FN = 91 ) True negatives ( TN = 381 ) 472 Total 377 393 770 Table 2 shows a fictitious data from an experiment to evaluate the accuracy of a certain test T for a certain set of patients with clinical suspicions .
The data are numbers of women with malignant or benign breast tumors .
Referring to the table , the sensitivity and specificity of the two-by-two table may be illustrated .
By using the numbers in the “ Malignant ” column , the sensitivity of a fictitious test T in the sample of women is 0.76 % ( 286 out of 377 ) and specificity of test T is calculated as 0.97 % ( 381 negative results out of 393 women with benign lesions ) .
Sensitivity Specificity Positive predictive value ( PPV ) Negative predictive value ( NPV )
Most of the work on diagnosis breast cancer .
Some of these works aim at detecting one or more of the three abnormal structures in mammograms ( Comer , Liu , & Delp , 1996 ) : microcalcifications ( Strickland & Hahn , 1996 ) , circumscribed masses ( Giger et al. , 1990 ) and speculated lesions ( Liu & Delp , 1997 ) .
Other methods depend on classifying the breast lesions as benign or malignant ( Brzakovic , Luo , & Brzakovic , 1990 ) .
There are problems with the subjective analysis of mammographic images by experience of the human operator , but it is also affected by fatigue and other human-related factors .
In addition , the interpretation is a repetitive task that requires lot of attention to minute details .
Hence , it requires lot of staff time and effort , which results in slowing the diagnosis time .
On the other hand , the objective analysis of mammograms , which is carried out by automated systems , provides consistent performance but its accuracy is usually lower .
Due to the sensitivity of this problem , we believe that radiologists should be involved and computers should not replace them completely .
However , computer systems can help them perform better by enhancing the quality of images , highlighting the suspicious regions and providing better analysis tools .
Ng , Peh , Fok , Sim , and Ng ( 2002 ) proposed an expert system based on the interpretation of mammographic and ultrasound images that may be used by expert and non-expert doctors in the interpretation and classifying of patient cases .
The expert system software consists of a mammographic ( MAMMEX ) and breast ultrasound ( SOUNDEX ) medical expert systems which may be used to deduce cases according to the Breast Imaging Recording and Data System ( BI-RADS ) based upon patients ’ history , physical and clinical assessment as well as mammograms and breast ultrasound images .
High quality mammogram images are high resolution and large size images .
Processing these images require high computational capabilities .
The transmission of these images over the net is sometimes critical especially if the diagnosis of remote radiologists is required .
AbuBaker , Qahwaji , Aqel , Al-Osta , and Saleh ( 2006 ) introduced a preprocessing technique for reducing the size and enhancing the quality of USF and MIAS mammogram images .
The algorithm analyses the mammogram image to determine if 16-bit to 8-bit conversion process is required .
Enhancement is applied later followed by a scaling process to reduce the mammogram size .
The performances of the algorithms are evaluated objectively and subjectively .
On average 87 % reduction in size is obtained with no loss of data at the breast region .
Elter , Schulz-Wendtland , and Wittenberg ( 2007 ) presented two novel CAD approaches that both emphasize an intelligible decision process to predict breast biopsy outcomes from BI-RADS™ findings .
An intelligible reasoning process is an important requirement for the acceptance of CAD systems by physicians .
The first approach induces a global model based on decision-tree learning .
The second approach is based on case-based reasoning and applies an entropic similarity measure .
They have evaluated the performance of both CAD approaches on two large publicly available mammography reference databases using receiver operating characteristic ( ROC ) analysis , bootstrap sampling , and the ANOVA statistical significance test .
Both approaches outperform the diagnosis decisions of the physicians .
Hence , both systems have the potential to reduce the number of unnecessary breast biopsies in clinical practice .
A comparison of the performance of the proposed decision tree and CBR approaches with a state of the art approach based on artificial neural networks ( ANN ) shows that the CBR approach performs slightly better than the ANN approach , which in turn results in slightly better performance than the decision-tree approach .
Differentiating between benign and malignant mammographic findings is difficult .
Only 15–30 % of biopsies performed on nonpalpable but mammographically suspicious lesions prove malignant ( Hall , Storella , Silverstone , & Wyshak , 1988 ) .
The high number of unnecessary breast biopsies causes major mental and physical discomfort for the patients as well as unnecessary expenses spent for examinations .
Therefore , the aim of Ex-DBC is to make these human errors minimum by catching and interpreting points that may be unrecognized by the radiologist .
For this , the artificial intelligence technology to be used in Ex-DBC has strong inference engine that can detect hidden relations in the case unrecognized by the human expert .
Ex-DBC system will be an innovative approach in diagnosis of breast cancer .
Besides , in the current study developed Ex-DBC system has high positive predictive rate ( 96 % ) and specificity ( 97 % ) for breast cancer .
Thus , this model can provide significant contributes to prevent unnecessary biopsy in diagnosis of breast cancer .
Besides it can be benefited from this system for training of students in medicine .