The menopausal period constitutes a challenging transition time for women ’ s health .
Menopausal women suffer from varying symptoms , which affect their life quality in different degrees .
This study focuses on menopausal symptoms and risk factors .
In order to predict the severity of menopausal symptoms ( measured by the KMI score ) , we propose an artificial neural network model .
Menopausal samples were collected from some hospital for this study .
We figured out nine potential risk factors as the inputs , which included age , educational background , employment status , monthly income , body mass index , age at menarche , parity , contraceptive and chronic disease .
KMI score was considered as the output .
The network was optimized with changes to training algorithm , network structure and percentage of training samples .
We also compared the artificial neural network with statistical analysis in the fitting accuracy .
Sensitivity study was then carried out to identify the factors which have significant impact on KMI score .
Finally , the contributions , limitations and future work were summarized .
This study provides useful information for the clinical practice .
Menopause is the permanent cessation of menstruation resulting from loss of ovarian follicular activity ( World Health Organization et al. , 1996 ) .
The menopausal transition demarks dramatic changes at the hormonal , physiological , and metabolic level ( Harlow et al. , 2012 ) .
These alterations , accompanied by burdensome life experiences and lifestyle changes , will lead to an increased risk of chronic noncommunicable disorders among women ( Organization , 2009 ) .
Menopause occurs often at the age of 50–51 with considerably variability among countries ( Thomas , Renaud , Benefice , DE MEEUS , & Guegan , 2001 ) .
It is estimated by the World Health Organization that in 2030 there will be around 1.2 billion postmenopausal ( Fig 1 ) ( Soules et al. , 2001 ) women , with 47 million women entering this stage of life every year ( Parente , Faerstein , Celeste , & Werneck , 2008 ) .
According to another report , the number of women over 50 in China was about 0.13 billion in 2000 , with an estimation of more than 0.28 billion by 2030 ( Li , Yu , Ma , Sun , & Yang , 2008 ) .
Chinese menopausal women make up a huge population , needing more attention and care .
The STRAW staging system Fig 1 .
The STRAW staging system .
In addition , China is now facing an aging society .
According to Chinese census results , the proportion of people over 60 years old will increase from 12 % in 2010 to over 30 % in 2050 , while the average life expectancy of women in 2050 will reach 77.37 years .
The increase in the number of aging population and life expectancy means that Chinese women tend to live longer after menopause .
The menopausal transition period constitutes a challenging transition time for women ’ s health , and good menopausal health is crucial to healthy aging ( Harlow et al. , 2012 ; Organization , 2009 ) .
Menopausal women may suffer from various types of symptoms .
Some studies found that the prevalence of menopausal symptoms was more than 50 % ( Chuni & Sreeramareddy , 2011 ) .
However , some studies reported that the prevalence and severity of menopausal symptoms varied among women in different racial groups ( Rahman , Zainudin , & Mun , 2010 ; Waidyasekera , Wijewardena , Lindmark , & Naessen , 2009 ) .
Kupperman Menopausal Index ( KMI ) ( Tong , Yang , & Wu , 2010 ) is widely used in hospitals to evaluate the severity and intensity of the menopausal symptoms .
As a cumulative symptom score , it is generated by summing up the score given for each of the 13 symptoms , including hot flushes and sweating , paresthesia , insomnia , nervousness , depression , vertigo , fatigue , arthralgia and myalgia , headache , heart palpitation , formication , sexual complaints , and urinary tract infection .
Based on the KMI score standards , participants are considered as normally , mildly , moderately and severely symptomatic with the total scoring less than or equal to 6 , 6–15 , 16–30 and larger than 30 points .
Based on the large number of menopausal women and the prevalence of menopausal symptoms , we carried out a study from September 2013 to December 2013 in the Menopause Clinic of Shanghai Sixth People ’ s Hospital , a large comprehensive tertiary level teaching hospital , founded in 1904 , Shanghai , China .
As we observed , doctors and nurses spent a lot of time measuring the KMI score to determine the condition when female patients went to the clinic .
According to the statistics , it accounted for more than one third of the whole diagnosis and treatment time .
In that case , we would like to seek for alternative methods to quickly and accurately obtain the KMI score .
One feasible way is to build a mathematical model that KMI score is considered as the output .
Combining current research results and clinical experience of the hospital , we finally consider nine potential influencing factors as independent variables of the model .
For general function approximation problems , the method of regression analysis has been widely used .
However , when the number of the model inputs gets large , such analysis is often ineffective .
Considering the large number of factors and complicated interactions , we apply the method of artificial neural network to solve the problem followed by sensitivity analysis to recognize significant factors .
It may be the first time for artificial intelligence used in menopausal studies .
This paper is organized as follows .
Section 1 briefly describes the severity of menopause in China , and the purpose of this study .
In Section 2 , literatures on menopausal symptoms and influencing factors are reviewed .
Section 3 introduces the method to be studied .
Section 4 includes the presentation and interpretation of the results , with detailed discussions in Section 5 and final conclusions in Section 6 .
To the best of our knowledge , previous studies in menopause can be divided into four aspects–the age at which the menopause starts and the influencing factors ( Calvet et al. , 2014 ) , description of menopausal symptoms and remedies ( Palacios , Currie , Mikkola , & Dragon , 2015 ) , factors associated with menopausal symptoms ( LeBlanc et al. , 2015 ) and introduction about menopausal scales ( Chedraui et al. , 2014 ) .
This paper mainly deals with the problem of building an artificial neural network model with KMI score and influencing factors .
Based on that , literatures involving the severity of menopausal symptoms and risk factors are summarized as follows .
Previous studies were based on population and only statistical methods were used .
Due to different population samples and metrics , the conclusions were sometimes similar , inconsistent and even contradictory .
Li et al .
( 2012 ) proposed that socio-economic status ( income and education background ) , Body mass index ( BMI ) , and parity were associated with the severity of menopausal symptoms , while oral contraceptive was not .
However , Gjelsvik , Rosvold , Straand , Dalen , and Hunskaar ( 2011 ) believed that BMI , parity and menarche age did not have significant influence .
Other studies mainly concentrated on single menopausal symptom , like depression .
A cross-sectional study ( Wang , Booth-LaForce , Tang , Wu , & Chen , 2013 ) with 566 women in Southern Taiwan suggested that depressive symptoms tended to be affected by chronic disease , while another study conducted in 266 women also from Southern Taiwan ( Lu , Tseng , Lin , Luh , & Shu , 2009 ) found no significant relation between chronic disease status and depressive symptoms .
Income was regarded as a risk factor associated with depressive symptoms in some studies ( Unsal , Tozun , & Ayranci , 2011 ) .
Woods et al .
( 2008 ) found a negative correlation between age and depressive symptoms .
In contrast , Timur and Sahin ( 2010 ) found a positive correlation .
However , most studies have shown no significant relation between age and depressive symptoms ( Brown , Gallicchio , Flaws , & Tracy , 2009 ; Lu et al. , 2009 ) .
According to a study carried out in the United States ( Al-Safi & Polotsky , 2015 ) , obese women ( high BMI ) were more likely to report vasomotor symptoms ( hot flushes and sweating ) during the menopausal transition , which was in agreement with Chedraui et al .
( 2007 ) .
Network structure Fig 2 .
Network structure .
The prevalence of sexual problems for menopausal women may vary according to racial and ethnic groups .
Surveys among Iranian and Thailand postmenopausal women have reported a higher prevalence ( Moghassemi , Ziaei , & Haidari , 2011 ; Peeyananjarassri , Liabsuetrakul , Soonthornpun , Choobun , & Manopsilp , 2008 ) , while those from western countries have reported a lower prevalence ( Clayton , 2007 ; Lindau et al. , 2007 ) .
Since the number of studies conducted for the severity of menopausal symptoms and risk factors is limited , and the identification of the influencing factors is controversial , we focus on this topic and would like to use the artificial intelligence method to build a precise mathematical model and then try to obtain the significant factors .
Based on the current research results and the data collected from the hospital , we specially regard age , educational background , employment status , monthly income , body mass index , age at menarche , parity , contraceptive and chronic disease as the inputs and KMI score as the output .
Artificial neural network is a mathematical model or computational model imitating the structure and function of biological neural networks .
The basic unit is artificial neuron .
Each input of the neuron is connected to one or several outputs of other similar neurons , thus forming a network .
Modern neural network is a non-linear statistical data modeling tool to reflect the relationship between inputs and outputs , or to explore the data pattern ( Chang , Chen , Chiu , & Chen , 2009 ; Hsieh , 2011 ; Hsu , 2011 ) .
Compared with conventional regression analysis , it has obvious advantages .
• Fault tolerance is good .
The neural network can accommodate samples with great individual differences .
( Menopause samples vary greatly with each other ) .
• Learning performance is great .
Once meeting unconventional individuals , the network can acquire new learning and store this memory .
• Reasoning performance is excellent .
Network may not need to learn and make a good prediction in some cases .
Network structure This study applies a single hidden layer back-propagation forward network ( Fig 2 ) .
n , k and m are marked as the number of cells in the input , intermediate and output layer .
Corresponding to the menopausal cases , the network has nine inputs and one output .
Target represents the actual KMI score .
The number of neurons in the middle layer is firstly set to be 10 .
Neurons of two adjacent layers are connected with certain weights .
Input of the network : x1 , … , x9 , respectively represent age , educational background , employment status , monthly income , body mass index , age at menarche , parity , contraceptive and chronic disease .
The weights passed from the input layer to the hidden layer : The net input into the hidden layer : The output of the hidden layer : The weights passed from the hidden layer to the output layer : The output of the network : 3.2 .
Network training of menopausal samples The network will be trained after its establishment .
During each training , the weights of different layers are changed .
Finally , the appropriate network will be obtained and the function approximation is to be completed .
To measure the performance of the network , the method of calculating the square sum of the errors is used .
The specific training process is presented in Fig 3 .
Firstly , the network is constructed with initial random weights and biases ( if there are any ) , and the errors of the responses can then be calculated .
If the errors are not small enough , the network will be trained by related algorithms , until it is acceptable to break the loop .
The process of network training Fig 3 .
The process of network training .
Generally , there are two groups of algorithms for feed-forward network training : the gradient methods and Gauss–Newton methods .
The steepest gradient descend method ( Marquardt , 1963 ) , the best well-known among the gradient ones , is the first training algorithm to be used in this study .
It is powerful to solve most function approximation problems while it also has inevitable drawbacks for not fitting the targets well in some cases and then another method should be explored .
We choose the Levenberg–Marquadt method ( Wilamowski & Yu , 2010 ) .
The steepest gradient descend algorithm : For the steepest gradient descend algorithm , the process that calculates the derivative of square sum of the errors and approaches the minimum point at a certain learning rate is called gradient descent .
During the learning process , weights are always updated in the negative gradient direction .
The steepest gradient descent method commonly uses three-tier structure , where the activation function is sigmoid in the intermediate layer and output layer .
After calculating the square sum of the errors by the output and the target , the derivative can be obtained : The feedback on weights is : If the squared error is still large , the training process is continued .
The Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm : Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm is actually a combination of the steepest gradient descent method and the Gauss–Newton method , aiming to rapidly increase the fitting accuracy at the beginning and reach the target as soon as possible when the fitting error is close to the minimum point .
In this algorithm , the network is consisted of sigmoid hidden layer and linear output layer .
Jacobian matrix is applied instead of Hessian matrix .
Jacobian matrix in the output layer : Jacobian matrix in the input layer : The updating process of the weights is : μ is s a positive number and I is a unit matrix .
The value of μ determines the speed of training .
The above procedures show the updating process of a single instance .
Similarly , if the square error is still too large , the network training continues .
Network performance with different training algorithms The network is established on the basis of the above two algorithms .
Off-line ( Rojas , 1996 ) method is used for network training .
In order to achieve the best one , each network is repeatedly trained 10,000 times .
Fig 4 shows the comparison of the two networks .
The three curves represent the fluctuation of the actual KMI score and the outputs of two networks .
The results derived from the two networks are somewhat different from the actual KMI score .
But the outputs based on the LM algorithm are closer to the actual values .
Comparison of the network outputs and actual KMI scores Fig 4 .
Comparison of the network outputs and actual KMI scores .
Then the regression analysis is carried out .
The scatter plot Fig 5 describes distributions of the points .
Apparently , the points in KMI-LM are more inclined to concentrate on both sides of the line while those in KMI-steepest are more dispersed .
Besides , the value of r can also be observed .
In fact , it indicates the goodness of fit and is exported by matlab .
The numerical results are displayed in Table 1 .
KMI versus LM and steepest Fig 5 .
KMI versus LM and steepest .
Table 1 .
Regression analysis : KMI versus LM and steepest .
Regression analysis : KMI versus LM Analysis of variance Source DF SS MS P Regression 1 9252.8 9252.8 0.000 Residual error 146 2076.2 14.2 Total 147 11329.0 Regression analysis : KMI versus steepest Analysis of variance Source DF SS MS P Regression 1 3099.3 3099.3 0.000 Residual error 146 8229.7 56.4 Total 147 11329.0 From Table 1 , the efficiency of the model can be reflected by the proportion of the regression model variance to the total variance .
And they are 81.5 % and 26.9 % , respectively , which means the fitting of the former is better .
Network optimization After comparing the two networks , the better one can be chosen for further study .
It is noted that the comparison is based on the same proportion of training samples ( 80 % ) and network structure ( 10 neurons in the hidden layer ) .
We strive to explore more excellent network with respect to small changes to the two parameters .
The scatter plot of division 4 and 5 Fig 6 .
The scatter plot of division 4 and 5 .
Dividing data with off-line training The samples are divided into three subsets that include training , validation and testing ones .
For optimal training , the experiments are carried out on different data divisions , changing the percentages of three subsets and evaluating the performances .
The training set starts at 65 % , and then increases to 85 % .
Each experiment is repeated 10,000 times , followed by a regression analysis between the network responses and the corresponding targets .
The correlation coefficients are shown in Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Sample percentage versus regression performance .
Division Training ( % ) Validation ( % ) Test ( % ) Regression 1 60 25 15 0.8107 2 70 20 10 0.8083 3 75 15 10 0.8271 4 80 15 5 0.9013 5 85 10 5 0.9517 From Table 2 , division 4 and 5 perform better with and .
Fig 6 shows the fitting results of the two divisions .
As it displays , when the training subset reaches 85 % of the samples , the network gets the most satisfying responses .
Changing the hidden layer size The discussion of choosing the algorithm and division of data is based on the appropriate size of hidden layer .
In fact , we intuitively adopt an initial 10-neuron hidden layer .
The size of the hidden layer can be optimized by experiments .
There are many rule-of-thumb methods for determining the correct number of neurons in the hidden layers , such as the following ones : • The number of hidden neurons should be between the size of the input layer and the size of the output layer .
• The number of hidden neurons should be two thirds the size of the input layer , plus the size of the output layer .
• The number of hidden neurons should be less than twice the size of the input layer .
Based on that , the number of neurons in the hidden layer is set from 8 to 12 and the performances are measured by the square sum of the errors ( SSE ) .
Likewise , the networks are trained ten thousand times to reduce random variance .
The training subset accounts for 85 % of all samples in the experiments .
The results of the comparison are listed in Table 3 .
Table 3 .
Hidden layer size versus performance .
Hidden layer size Overall r-value SSE Testing r-value 8 0.7994 34.0897 0.897 9 0.8062 121.3277 0.832 10 0.9517 60.8536 0.856 11 0.8901 329.2939 0.702 12 0.7966 469.2839 0.603 We try to find the network with acceptable training errors and good network generalization , which is measured by lower SSE and larger Overall r-value .
From Table 3 and Fig 7 , a ten-neuron hidden layer is the best choice .
The performance of different hidden layer size Fig 7 .
The performance of different hidden layer size .
Comparison between traditional statistical methods and neural network Statistical methods are widely used to solve menopausal problems , especially regression analysis in building mathematical models .
However , it is not available for predicting KMI score .
For multiple linear regression , we can not get effective regression results .
The value of r ( represents the significance level of fitting ) is equal to 0.410 , where the value larger than 0.9 means the regression is valid .
Compared with that , multiple logistic regression even can not be completed because there are too many factors and some of them contain too many levels .
Besides , we have also tried the method of curve fitting analysis and then we figure out that the distribution of the original data is extremely discrete .
For example , the results of the simulation between age and KMI score are listed in Table 4 .
Table 4 .
Curve fitting between age and KMI scores .
Ways of fitting Value of r Standard deviation Linear 0.286 8.398 Quadratic 0.318 8.338 Cubic 0.322 8.327 Logarithmic 0.296 8.373 Exponential 0.296 0.507 From Table 4 , the value of r is close to 0.3 in whatever linear or non-linear fitting ways , which indicates ineffective regression .
Likewise , the analytical relationship between other independent variables and KMI score can not be described either .
Compared to regression analysis , the method of neural network can guarantee high fitting accuracy ( larger than 0.9 ) .
It is good at describing the systems with stronger nonlinear characteristics and difficult to express in precise mathematical models .
Sensitivity analysis We have obtained the optimal network with Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm , 85 % training samples and 10-neuron in the hidden layer , where the value of r is 0.9517 .
Furthermore , we would like to find the significant factors by sensitivity analysis .
The Tchaban method , put forward by Tchaban and Taylor ( Tchaban , Taylor , & Griffin , 1998 ) is applied .
The principle is to calculate the sensitivity based on the weights and neuron output value .
The impact passed of the input neuron i on the hidden layer neuron j : The impact passed of the hidden layer neuron j on the output layer neuron k : The sensitivity from the input xi to the output yk : The raw data is included into ( 0,1 ) after quantitative processing and the weight matrix can be output through the optimal network .
The results are listed as follows .
We also use the method of correlation analysis from SPSS ( Version 19 ) to extract the main factors .
The results are displayed in Table 5 .
Table 5 .
The results of correlation analysis .
Factors Significance level Age 0.000 Educational background 0.009 Employment status 0.020 Monthly income 0.035 Body mass index 0.641 Age at menarche 0.205 Parity 0.740 Contraceptive 0.600 Chronic disease 0,002 Combining the results of sensitivity analysis and correlation analysis , we can conclude that age , educational background , employment status , monthly income and chronic disease are the significant factors .
The strengths and weakness In this study , we apply the method of artificial neural network , different from statistical methods used in previous menopausal studies .
The advantages of the artificial intelligence method are obvious .
Firstly , it can guarantee high accuracy of model , for the good fault tolerance , learning and reasoning performance .
As can be seen from the above discussion , due to the large number and high complexity of the independent variables , as well as the discrete data , statistical methods can not get effective results .
In contrast , the fitting accuracy of the artificial neural network is high .
Secondly , the network can be optimized by changing the training algorithm , proportion of the training samples , and hidden layer size .
As a result , the fitting accuracy can reach 0.95 after the optimization .
Thirdly , good performance of the model can bring good prediction results , which can be seen from Testing r-value in Table 3 .
Last but not least , the optimized network can be further studied to identify significant influencing factors , where the weight matrix of the network is crucial to the sensitivity analysis .
The weakness of the proposed method is that the specific mathematical model is unknown due to the inherent feature of artificial neural network .
It is just like a black box , only the inputs and outputs can be observed .
Thus how the risk factors affect the severity of menopausal symptoms and the interaction among the factors can not be obtained .
The motivation of our study based on the current research situations .
The number of studies on menopausal symptoms and risk factors is limited and the conclusions in the existing researches are sometimes inconsistent or even contradictory .
In addition , only statistical methods are applied in all the existing studies and none of them has ever built mathematical models .
The most important is that we need to seek for mathematical method to obtain the KMI score because filling out the KMI scale takes too much time in clinical practice .
The mainly contributions of this study are summarized as follows : firstly , we have figured out nine risk factors according to the existing researches and clinical practice .
Since the identification of the factors is controversial , we have considered all the potential influencing factors as the inputs of the model .
Secondly , we have developed an artificial neural network to predict KMI score , where it could be first time to apply this method in menopausal studies .
The artificial intelligence method is superior to statistical analysis in fitting accuracy because there are too many inputs and discrete original data .
Thirdly , we have compared two training algorithms , distinct network structures and percentages of training samples to explore the optimal network .
As a result , the fitting accuracy increases to 0.9517 .
Last but not least , we have carried out the sensitivity analysis and recognized the significant factors .
Specifically , age , monthly income , educational background , employment status and chronic disease have greater impact on the severity of menopausal symptoms .
There are still some limitations for this study .
On the one hand , the number of the menopausal cases is a bit small and thus the built network is not so steady .
The satisfying results could not be obtained until the networks were repeatedly trained many times .
On the other hand , although we have built a network with high accuracy , the relationship between the factors and KMI score is still unknown .
Despite these limitations , this study provides an alternative method for solving menopausal problems .
Based on varying research topics , we can consider more mathematical methods in addition to statistical analysis .
Moreover , the results of this study can provide useful information for the clinical practice .
Next , we will continue to work with the hospital and collect more instances to optimize the existing model .
And then we will try to integrate the network into a software .
As long as filling in the patients ’ information , the severity of the menopausal symptoms can be automatically determined , which will bring great convenience both to the doctors and the patients .
More researches can be conducted on the risk factors .
On the one hand , we will carry on studying how the significant factors affect the KMI score .
On the other hand , further study is needed to consider more factors , like the marital status , environmental and lifestyle factors .