Mass soldering of electronic components is one of the key processes in electronics production , because it affects directly the functionality of the final product .
Mass soldering , like other processes of manufacturing electronics , is constantly facing new challenges arising from the evolving production environment , increasing product variety and complexity , miniaturization of components and products , new environmental regulations , and increasing time-based competition .
In the last two decades , advancements in information technology and data acquisition systems have promoted the use of manufacturing-related data in process improvement , which has also promoted the use of new computational methods and made them more applicable to industrial problems .
Especially computational intelligence and its applications have expanded among the different fields of industry .
The benefits of these so called intelligent methods include an ability to learn from experience , to self-organize and to adapt in response to dynamically changing conditions , and a considerable potential in solving real world problems .
This survey provides an insight to the application of computational intelligence to mass soldering of electronics .
The survey includes a summary on the main application fields of these methods in the past , what methods have been typically used , and what the most probable application fields will be in the future .
Production of electronics involves many manufacturing processes from automated assembly lines to testing and final manual assembly .
Mass soldering of electronic components is an extremely important process in that manufacturing chain , because it involves the formation of the connection between the electronic components and pads , which affects directly the functionality of the final product .
Defective solder joints inevitably cause functional problems in the final product .
Despite the fact that the process of automated soldering of electronics is several decades old , it is still under constant development .
This is because of the prevailing trends in electronics manufacturing including time-based competition , increasing product variety and novel technologies ( Helo , 2004 ) .
Environmental regulations ( e.g .
Directive 2002/95/EC : Restriction of the use of Hazardous Substances in Electrical and Electronic Equipment , ROHS ) , the reduction of component and product size , and the increasing complexity of electronic products , for example , have created needs for further development of electronics production in the 21st century ( Barbini & Wang , 2005 ; Havia , Bernhardt , Mikkonen , Montonen , & Alatalo , 2005 ) .
A factory used for manufacturing electronics is a challenging environment for process improvement in many ways .
The environment evolves rapidly and the electronic products tend to have short life cycles ( Gebus & Leiviskä , 2009 ) .
Rapid exchange of different product types is essential in assembly lines , which necessitates a fast exchange of process parameters .
In addition , the increasing frequency of introducing new products and their new versions requires fast responding in the production .
All kinds of changes in the production , both sudden and long-term , potentially cause problems , which often cause defective products , and therefore process improvement has remained extremely important in the electronics industry .
The volume of data grows fast in modern manufacturing due to new digital production environments , which exploit technologies such as barcodes , sensors and vision systems in data acquisition ( Choudhary , Harding , & Tiwari , 2009 ) .
On the other hand , recent advancements in information technology , data acquisition systems and storage technology have promoted the use of manufacturing-related data in process improvement ( Harding , Shahbaz , Srinivas , & Kusiak , 2006 ) .
For these reasons computational methods which exploit historical process data have become more applicable and their use in process improvement is growing rapidly .
The computational methods used by the electronics industry for process improvement vary greatly from simple regression models to complex advanced models , such as artificial neural networks .
It is important to note , however , that simple statistical methods are generally used , because they are fast , simple to understand and relatively easy to implement .
Statistical methods used traditionally in the data analysis of mass soldering include troubleshooting charts , control charts , design of experiments and , most recently , the Taguchi method .
Usually these methods exploit conventional statistical calculus such as regression or variance analysis .
Despite their benefits , which include simplicity , rapidness and minor computational load , the statistical methods have also significant drawbacks .
They are usually unable to detect nonlinear interactions between data elements .
Moreover , they are generally unable to discover complex multivariate dependences between the elements .
The lack of adaptivity is another significant drawback , because it restricts the ability of the method to adapt to dynamically changing situations , which are typical for electronics production .
Recent development in the study called computational intelligence ( CI ) has provided new intelligent methods for automated extraction of useful information ( Wang , 2007 ) and the last decade has involved an expansion of computationally intelligent applications to a large variety of industrial processes ( Choudhary et al. , 2009 ; Harding et al. , 2006 ; Kadlec , Gabrys , & Strandt , 2009 ; Kohonen , 2001 ; Meireles , Almeida , & Simões , 2003 ) .
Nonetheless , electronics manufacturers have adhered to traditional statistical or analytical methods and it seems that the archived process history is not used as extensively and thoroughly as one could .
It is quite common that modern production devices include good functions for data acquisition , but they are either not used at all or the data collected by the system are transferred to data bases without exploiting them thoroughly .
In this respect , CI which utilizes process history would offer a promising platform for developing new ways of analyzing data and can potentially provide a useful path to process improvement .
Computationally intelligent methods have several advantages over conventional statistical methods .
An ability to learn from experience , to self-organize and to adapt in response to dynamically changing conditions , and a considerable potential in solving real world problems , for example , are properties typically inherent in computationally intelligent systems .
One of the advantages of computationally intelligent methods is their ability to learn and generalize ( Haykin , 2009 ) , which means that they are able to extract knowledge from large amounts of data .
Artificial neural networks , fuzzy sets , rough sets and evolutionary computation are methods typically associated with CI .
The state of the art of applying computational intelligence to mass soldering of electronics is reviewed in this survey .
The aims are to discover , how the methods have been used in the past , what methods have been typically used , what the future of these methods is in the electronics industry and what the main application fields are in the future .
Computational intelligence is often associated with elements such as flexibility , ability to learn from experience , problem solving and decision-making in systems that are complex or changing dynamically .
Engelbrecht ( 2007 ) , for example , has proposed that computational intelligence is the study of adaptive mechanisms to enable or facilitate intelligent behavior in complex and changing environments .
In fact , complexity and unpredictability of the system are often the reasons for which computational intelligence is relied on .
Pal and Pal ( 2002 ) suggest that a computationally intelligent system should possess properties which include elements of intelligent behavior such as a considerable potential in solving real world problems , an ability to learn from experience , an ability to self-organize and an ability to adapt in response to dynamically changing conditions .
To summarize the above , CI methods mimic biologically intelligent behavior in order to solve problems which are difficult to solve by statistical methods or classical mathematics .
CI can utilize a variety of methods to achieve this .
The methods of computational intelligence used in the production of electronics include artificial neural networks , fuzzy sets , rough sets and evolutionary computation .
Artificial neural networks Artificial neural networks ( ANN ) form a major group among the methods of computational intelligence .
ANNs can be classified into two groups , which separates the methods based on supervised and unsupervised ( self-organizing ) learning ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
In supervised learning , the weights of a network are adjusted so that it produces a desired mapping of input to output activations ( Riedmiller , 1994 ) .
The mapping is represented by a set of patterns , which includes examples of the desired function .
In supervised learning the correct results , or desired outputs , are known , whereas in unsupervised learning training is completely data-driven .
Unsupervised learning aims at auto-associating information from the network inputs with a fundamental reduction of data dimension , in the same way as extracting principal components in linear systems ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
In unsupervised learning the neighboring units compete in their activities by means of mutual lateral information and adapt to specific patterns in the input signals ( Kohonen , 2001 ) .
For this reason , this form of learning is also called competitive learning .
Alternatively , artificial neural networks can be categorized by the way they process data through the network ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
Feed forward , or nonrecurrent , neural networks always process their outputs forward in the network : the neurons in an input layer propagate their outputs to a hidden layer , and the neurons in the hidden layer forward their outputs to an output layer .
In contrast an ANN , in which the outputs can proceed both forward and backward , is called recurrent .
Multilayer perceptron Multilayer perceptrons ( MLP ) are widely-used feed-forward neural networks ( Haykin , 2009 ; Kadlec et al. , 2009 ; Meireles et al. , 2003 ) , which consist of processing elements and connections .
The processing elements include an input layer , one or more hidden layers , and an output layer .
In MLP networks , input signals are forwarded through successive layers of neurons on a layer-by-layer basis ( Haykin , 2009 ) .
First the input layer distributes the inputs to the first hidden layer .
Next , the neurons in the hidden layer summarize the inputs based on predefined weights , which either strengthen or weaken the impact of each input .
The weights are defined by learning from examples ( supervised learning ) .
The inputs are next processed by a transfer function and the neurons transfer the result as a linear combination to the next layer , which is usually the output layer .
Radial basis function networks Radial basis function network ( RBFN ) was introduced by Broomhead and Lowe ( 1988 ) .
The main difference between RBFN and MLP is that the links connecting the neurons of the input layer to the neurons of the hidden layer are direct connections with no weights ( Haykin , 2009 ) .
Thus , the size of the hidden layer , which consists of nonlinear radial basis functions , equals the number of inputs .
The second layer of the network is weighted and the output neurons are simple summing junctions ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
Because of its structure the main limitation of RBFNs is the high demand of computational resources , especially when dealing with a large number of training samples .
Support vector machine Support vector machine ( SVM ) is a category of feed-forward neural networks pioneered by Vapnik ( 1998 ) ; original description of the method by Boser , Guyon , & Vapnik , 1992 ) .
This supervised learning method can be used for classification and regression .
The SVM is based on using hyperplanes as decision surfaces in a multidimensional space , in which the optimal separation is reached with the largest distance to the nearest neighboring data points used in training .
A data point is considered an n-dimensional vector and the goal is to separate the data points with a linear classifier , an n-1 dimensional hyperplane .
The major drawback of SVMs is the fast increase of computing and storage requirements with the number of training samples ( Haykin , 2009 ) , which limits their use in practical applications .
Recurrent neural networks A recurrent neural network architecture is different from a feed-forward neural network in that it has at least one feedback loop ( Haykin , 2009 ) .
In consequence , a neuron receives inputs both externally from network inputs and internally from feedback loops .
Perhaps the most popular of recurrent networks is the Hopfield network , which generally consists of a single layer of neurons .
The Hopfield network is totally interconnected , which means that all the neurons are connected to each other ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
Thus it forms a multiple-loop feedback system ( Haykin , 2009 ) .
The Hopfield network can be used as associative memory and in optimization problems , for instance ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
Probabilistic neural networks Probabilistic neural networks ( PNN ) ( Specht , 1988 ) are neural networks that utilize kernel-based approximation in forming an estimate of the probability density functions of classes .
The method is used especially in problems of classification and pattern recognition .
PNNs are almost similar in structure to MLPs ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
The main differences between the methods are in the activation and in the connection patterns between neurons .
An advantage over MLP is that PNN works entirely in parallel and the input signals proceed in one direction , without a need for feedback from the neurons to the inputs ( Meireles et al. , 2003 ) .
Self-organizing maps Self-organizing maps ( Kohonen , 2001 ) are a special type of unsupervised artificial neural networks based on competitive learning : the output neurons compete with each other in training to be activated ( Haykin , 2009 ) .
In a self-organizing map the neurons are located at the nodes of a lattice including usually two dimensions .
The self-organizing network is trained with a “ winner-takes-all ” rule , which is based on defining the best matching unit ( BMU ) for each input vector .
As a result , the nonlinear relationships between the elements of high-dimensional data are transformed into simple geometric relationships of their image points on a low-dimensional display ( Kohonen , 2001 ) , which makes it an effective method for visualizing multivariate data , for example .
Learning vector quantization Learning vector quantization ( LVQ ) is a supervised learning algorithm , in which each class of input examples is represented by its own set of reference vectors .
Although the method does not involve unsupervised learning , it is closely related to SOM .
The purpose of LVQ is to describe borders between classes by using the nearest neighbor rule ( Kohonen , 2001 ) .
New incoming data vectors are separated on the basis of the so called quantization regions , or Voronoi sets , defined by hyperplanes between the neighboring reference vectors .
Thus , LVQ can be used in pattern recognition or classification , for example .
The applications of LVQ have included image analysis , speech analysis and recognition , signal processing , and different industrial measurements , for instance ( Kohonen , 2001 ) .
Decision trees Decision tree ( DT ) learning is a method of data mining which can be used to partition data using the input variables and a class purity measure ( Hand , Mannila , & Smyth , 2001 ) .
In DT learning , a decision tree is used as a predictive model to estimate an output variable based on several input variables .
The goal of DT learning is to form a tree-like structure in which most of the data points included in one node belong to the same class .
Thus , different levels of the resulting tree structure represent hierarchical information on the clustering behavior of the data .
The most famous DT algorithms include Classification and Regression Decision Trees ( CART ; Breiman , Friedman , Olshen , & Stone , 1984 ) , Iterative Dichotomiser 3 ( ID3 ; Quinlan , 1986 ) and C4.5 and C5.0 , which are extensions of the ID3 .
Fuzzy methods 2.3.1 .
Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic Fuzzy set theory ( FST ) is an exact mathematical framework in which vague conceptual phenomena can be examined rigorously ( Tripathy , 2009 ) .
According to Zadeh ( 1965 ) who first introduced the fuzzy sets , a fuzzy set is a class of objects with a continuum of grades of membership .
The fundament of FST is to enable graded membership of data elements instead of two-valued ( true/false ) membership logic ( Tripathy , 2009 ) .
Fuzzy logic is a multi-valued logic derived from the fuzzy set theory , which makes it possible to apply approximate capabilities of human reasoning to knowledge-based systems .
Fuzzy logic has emerged in a large variety of applications in recent years ( Alavala , 2008 ) .
Rough sets 2.4.1 .
Rough set theory Rough set theory ( RST ) is a mathematical theory developed by Pawlak ( 1982 ) for classificatory analysis of data tables .
It is based on creating rough sets , which are estimations of precise sets , approximated by a pair of sets , which are called a lower and upper approximation of the original set ( Tripathy , 2009 ) .
Thus , RST can handle imperfect and vague datasets .
Like the fuzzy set theory , the original purpose of RST is to understand and manipulate imperfect knowledge ( Tripathy , 2009 ) .
The main difference between the theories is that in RST a membership function is not needed like in fuzzy sets , and the method can therefore avoid pre-assumptions .
RST provides a method for data mining that can be used for finding relevant features from data or decision rules for classification and for reducing the size of data , just to name a few examples .
Evolutionary computation Evolutionary computation techniques adapt the evolutionary principles of the nature into algorithms that can be used to solve problems .
Genetic algorithms ( GA ; Holland , 1975 ) , the most famous form of evolutionary computation , are search algorithms loosely based on the mechanics of natural selection and genetics .
GAs start with a set of random solutions called a population , which is a difference to conventional search strategies .
The population consists of individuals , each of which represent a solution to the problem .
The solutions are evaluated during successive iterations using fitness measures and improve with every generation , which constantly leads to a new generation of evolved solutions .
Ultimately , the algorithm converges to the best solution ( Gen & Cheng , 1997 ) .
Hybrid intelligence Hybrid intelligence is becoming an ever more popular field of computational intelligence .
Particularly combining neural networks and fuzzy systems in a united framework has been general in recent years .
The purpose of these so called hybrid systems is to benefit from the advantageous special properties of different methods and to reach a better performance in problem-solving than by using only the standard methods as such .
Alavala ( 2008 ) has grouped the hybrid systems into three categories : • Sequential hybrid systems : the output of one method becomes the input for another method , so the methods do not work in integrated combination .
• Auxiliary hybrid systems : one method uses the other as a subroutine to process data by it ( master-slave system ) .
• Embedded hybrid systems : the methods are integrated into a complete fusion , so that both methods need the other to solve the problem .
Electronics assembly generally involves soldering of components onto a printed circuit board .
Two metal surfaces are joined together in soldering by metallic bonds , which are created as the molten solder between the PCBs connecting pad and the termination of the component solidifies .
Hand soldering is a process in which the components are soldered manually using a soldering iron .
In the electronics industry hand soldering is used in special cases such as soldering individual components that are difficult or problematic to solder in mass , or reworking and repairing .
In mass soldering , also called machine soldering or automatic soldering , several components are soldered onto a printed board ( PCB ) simultaneously without manual application of solder .
Dip soldering , drag soldering , wave soldering and reflow soldering ( see Fig 1 ) are the most typical mass soldering methods ( Khandpur , 2005 ) .
Mass soldering methods Fig 1 .
Mass soldering methods .
( a ) Dip soldering , ( b ) drag soldering , ( c ) wave soldering , ( d ) reflow soldering .
In dip soldering an assembled PCB is lowered into a bath of molten solder .
The board is kept in the bath for a suitable time and then lifted off .
In drag soldering the PCB is dragged over the surface of molten solder .
( Judd & Brindley , 1999 ) .
Dip and drag soldering are nowadays rarely used for mass soldering applications .
Wave soldering is the standard method for mass soldering of leaded through-hole components ( Khandpur , 2005 ) .
In wave soldering a solder pump creates a wave of molten solder , over which the PCB assembly is transported .
The flow of hot solder touches the contact surfaces on the underside of the board , eventually leading to a joint between the lead wires and the board contact surface .
Surface mount assembly is a process of reflow soldering , above all .
Commonly used mass reflow methods include infrared , convection , vapor phase , and conduction-based reflow systems , although there are also other , not so common methods used especially in low volume production .
Combinations of different heating systems are also commonly used .
( Lee , 2002 ) Characteristic for all reflow soldering methods is that the PCB assembly , with the solder paste applied and components placed onto it , is heated in a reflow oven , whereby the paste melts and the solder forms the connection between components and connection pads .
Reflow soldering has become the primary technology for mass soldering of surface mount components , because of its flexibility and high throughput rate .
A time chart showing the history of computationally intelligent methods in the mass soldering of electronics is given in Fig 2 .
Classification of the applications according to application area and according to computational method can be seen in Figs .
3 and 4 , respectively .
Time chart showing the history of computationally intelligent methods in the… Fig 2 .
Time chart showing the history of computationally intelligent methods in the mass soldering of electronics .
GA = genetic algorithms , SOM = self-organizing maps , LVQ = learning vector quantization , MLP = multilayer perceptron , SVM = support vector machine , PNN = probabilistic neural networks , RST = rough sets and DT = decision trees .
Classification of applications according to application area Fig 3 .
Classification of applications according to application area .
Classification of applications according to computational method Fig 4 .
Classification of applications according to computational method .
MLP = multilayer perceptron , SOM = self-organizing maps and learning vector quantization , PNN = probabilistic .
Quality management : analyzing , predicting and optimizing soldering quality Quality management has been the main application field of intelligent methods with regard to mass soldering of electronics .
One of the earliest applications was presented by Li , Mahajan , and Tong ( 1994 ) who studied the effects of design factors on PCB assembly yield using both regression and neural network models trained with back-propagation .
The authors used analysis of variance to reduce the number of parameters in the regression models .
The ANN models ( average R2 = 89.5 ) performed better in their experiments than the regression models ( average R2 = 81.3 ) .
Kusiak and Kurasek ( 2001 ) used an approach based on the rough set theory to data mining of printed circuit board defects .
They managed to identify the causes of quality faults in a SMT assembly line with a rule-based method for extracting knowledge .
In addition , the method was able to recognize PCBs with no faults accurately .
Nonetheless , the classification accuracy for faulty objects was not so good .
Furthermore , Coit , Jackson , and Smith ( 2002 ) predicted soldering quality in wave soldering .
A back-propagation algorithm and a network consisting of 13 input variables and two hidden layers were used to produce three binary outputs : excellent , good and fair solder quality .
The results of the study were moderate , i.e .
about 80 % of classifications were correct , but it was beneficial that in erroneous cases the network predicted a higher defect level rather than a lower one .
Yang and Tsai ( 2002 ) implemented a neurofuzzy system for defect prediction and control of a surface mount assembly line .
The system was able to identify all defects , but produced , however , a few false alarms .
The authors reported that the downtime inflicted by defects was reduced remarkably by 47 % after implementing the system .
A little later , Tseng , Jothishankar , and Wu ( 2004 ) used an extended approach based on the rough set theory to a problem of quality control in PCB assembly .
They managed to predict 97 % of the solder balls , so the method overcame clearly the statistical methods used in their comparative studies .
Moreover , Tsironis , Bilalis , and Moustakis ( 2005 ) studied the use of machine learning in quality management of a process for manufacturing ISDN modems .
The purpose was to demonstrate the applicability of two machine learning methods , i.e .
decision tree induction and association rules mining , by extracting rules for quality management .
The extracted rules were then used in the modeling of cause-effect relationships associated with faulty products .
The authors state that both approaches exhibited a good accuracy of results ( average error ca .
9 % ) .
Rule mining outperformed the decision trees in the correctness of learned rules , however .
More recently , Lin , Deng , Shie , and Yang ( 2007 ) created a predictive model for the sheer force of reflow-soldered joints of ball grid array packages .
Their system was based on integrated use of a multilayer feed-forward neural network for modeling and sequential quadratic programming for optimization .
The ANN model was able to achieve a correlation of 0.933 in terms of R2 between the real and predicted shear force .
Zhou , Xiao , En , Chen , and Wang ( 2008 ) combined a back-propagating ANN with particle swarm optimization to optimize thermo-mechanical fatigue reliability of solder joints in plastic ball grid arrays .
They stated that their procedure for intelligent optimization was a great improvement to the traditional ( Taguchi ) optimization method .
Furthermore , Meyer , Wohlrabe , and Wolter ( 2009 ) used neural networks with back-propagation to predict void generation in a PCB assembly process , achieving over 90 % accuracies for different component types .
They also studied the effects of different parameters on model accuracy and concluded that the influencing parameters change from model to model .
Liukkonen , Havia , Leinonen , and Hiltunen ( 2009a ) presented an application based on self-organizing maps and k-means clustering for the analysis of wave soldering process .
They managed to create new sub-models for soldering defects , revealing interactions which were not perceivable using conventional computing methods .
In addition , modeling of soldering quality using multilayer perceptrons was studied by Liukkonen , Hiltunen , Havia , Leinonen , and Hiltunen ( 2009b ) .
The authors concentrated on selecting the most important variables with respect to different soldering defects using both a linear method ( multiple linear regression ) and a nonlinear one ( multilayer perceptron neural network with back-propagation ) .
A remarkable improvement in the model accuracies was reported when the MLP algorithm was used instead of the linear one .
Quality-oriented optimization of wave soldering using self-organizing maps was proposed by Liukkonen , Havia , Leinonen , and Hiltunen ( 2010 ) .
The main finding of the paper is that the SOM offers a visual and relatively easy alternative to the nonlinear modeling and optimization of a mass soldering process .
The authors concluded that the SOM offers a practical platform for indicating and visualizing the variation of total product quality .
The method can also be used in estimating optimal process parameters .
Quality control : inspection of solder joints Detection of faulty solder joints is an important part of electronics production , because flaws can cause short circuits and missing contacts impeding the correct functioning of products .
Therefore a variety of applications have been developed to recognize faulty solder joints .
Cho and Park ( 2002 ) , for example , presented a variety of optical inspection systems based on neural networks for this purpose .
As a matter of fact , inspection of solder joints can be considered a part of quality management , but it is separated here due to the diversity of applications and because it forms a clear and separate entity within quality management .
Inspection of solder joints has been the main application of computational intelligence in the production of electronics .
Particularly multilayer perceptrons with back-propagation have been a popular method for inspecting solder joints ( see Acciani , Brunetti , & Fornarelli , 2006a ; Edinbarough , Balderas , & Bose , 2005 ; Eppinger , Huber , & Pham , 1995 ; Jagannathan , 1997 ; Jagannathan , Seebaluck , & Jenness , 1992 ; Kim , Cho , & Kim , 1996a ; Kim , Cho , Moon , & Park , 1999 ; Koji , Takatsu , & Oh , 1996 ; Lu , Zhang , & Kuang , 2008 ; Matsushima , Kawai , Fujie , Yasuda , & Fujimoto , 2010 ; Neubauer , 1997 ; Pierce , Shelton , Longbotham , Baddipudi , & Yan , 1994 ; Ryu & Cho , 1997 ; Sankaran , Embrechts , Harsson , Kraft , & Millard , 1995 ) .
Nevertheless , there are also applications based on self-organizing maps and learning vector quantization ( Kim & Cho , 1995 ; Ong , Samad , & Ratnam , 2008 ; Pierce et al. , 1994 ; Roh , Park , & Cho , 2003 ) , support vector machines ( Yun , Sim , & Kim , 2000 ) , probabilistic neural networks ( Liu , Ume , & Achari , 2004 ; Sankaran , Kalukin , & Kraft , 1998 ) , fuzzy logic ( Chunquan , 2007 ; Chunquan , Dejian , & Zhaohua , 2004 ; Pupin & Resadi , 1994 ; Voci , Eiho , & Sugimoto , 2002 ; Wei & Frantti , 2002 ) , genetic algorithms ( Saenthon & Kaitwanidvilai , 2010 ) and hybrid intelligence ( Acciani , Brunetti , & Fornarelli , 2006b ; Giaquinto , Fornarelli , Brunetti , & Acciani , 2009 ; Halgamuge & Glesner , 1994 ; Kim , Cho , Moon , & Park , 1996b ; Ko & Cho , 2000 ) .
These applications are discussed more deeply in the following paragraphs .
MLP and back-propagation The earliest intelligent systems for solder joint evaluation originate from the early 1990s .
Jagannathan et al .
( 1992 ) proposed a system using intelligent machine vision to inspect wave soldered joints .
They reached a ratio of 98.75 % successful classifications in classifying the joints into defective and non-defective ones .
Pierce et al .
( 1994 ) developed an automated inspection system that identified solder joints from an X-ray image and classified them as good or corrupted using both back-propagation and a Kohonen network ( SOM ) .
The back-propagation routine was reported to classify 86 % of the solder joints correctly , whereas the SOM managed to classify 77.5 % of the joints right .
Eppinger et al .
( 1995 ) used a data set from an automated solder joint inspection system to demonstrate the benefits of neural networks over statistical methods in both feature selection and classification .
They discovered that the applied multilayer neural network with back-propagation produced a significant improvement in performance when compared to traditional classification methods .
The improvement was obtained at the expense of significant computational resources , however .
After all , the errors of classification were also relatively high ( 9 % at their lowest ) on the whole .
Sankaran et al .
( 1995 ) reported a performance of as high as 92 % in identifying solder joint defects .
They used visible light images as source data and analyzed the data with a back-propagating neural network , using additionally several other methods for data compression and feature extraction .
Kim et al .
( 1996a ) used a neural network based on back-propagation to classify solder joints of commercially manufactured PCB assemblies , attaining high rates ( 97–100 % ) for right classifications .
Koji et al .
( 1996 ) used a neural network with one hidden layer to inspect soldering quality utilizing optical images taken from soldered leads of semiconductor packages .
They managed to reach a 100 % detection rate for defective samples and 95.7 % detection rate for normal solder joints .
Ryu and Cho ( 1997 ) used a neural network to classify accurately ( ca .
98 % ) two kinds of solder joints with respect to soldering quality , using 10 data features from automatic visual inspection .
Neubauer ( 1997 ) used a three-layered MLP successfully in detecting voids in solder joints imaged by automated X-ray inspection .
Moreover , Jagannathan ( 1997 ) used back-propagation in a two-stage classifier for wave soldered joints , which classified the samples into three different categories ( good , excess , no solder ) accurately ( 100 % ) .
Kim et al .
( 1999 ) reported on classification of four types of solder joints ( good , none , insufficient , excess solder ) using a multilayer perceptron network , which produced 98–100 % accuracies within the classes .
In addition , they used a Bayesian classifier in uncertain cases .
Edinbarough et al .
( 2005 ) developed a visual inspection system that utilizes a single layer neural network with multiple neurons in identifying common defects in electronics manufacturing and managed to reach a 100 % performance using the system .
Acciani et al .
( 2006a ) experimented with both multilayer perceptrons and learning vector quantization in classifying solder joints into five different categories from poor to excess solder .
By combining the geometric and wavelet features extracted from the images of joints they were able to achieve the performance of 98.8 % for the MLP and 97.1 % for the LVQ method .
Lu et al .
( 2008 ) improved an automated optical inspection system by developing an intelligent application based on back-propagating neural networks to the classification of solder joints .
They reported on achieving a high accuracy for classification .
Moreover , Matsushima et al .
( 2010 ) used a back-propagating neural network in automatic inspection of solder joints .
They reported on achieving 0 % of misjudgment and also managed to decrease the processing time by using principal component analysis as a pre-processing step for the neural network .
SOM and LVQ Pierce et al .
( 1994 ) used X-ray images and analyzed them with both back-propagation and Kohonen network ( SOM ) to inspect the quality of through-hole solder joints .
The back-propagation routine was able to classify 86 % of the solder joints correctly , whereas the performance of the Kohonen network was significantly lower ( 77.5 % ) .
Kim and Cho ( 1995 ) used LVQ to classify solder joints into five classes , ranging from insufficient to excess solder .
They compared the performance of the method to that of methods based on back-propagation and Kohonen self-organizing networks and managed to attain a fairly good accuracy for both the back-propagation and LVQ methods ( 94 % and 93 % , respectively ) .
LVQ is the method proposed by the authors , however , because it is faster and simpler to implement .
Furthermore , Roh et al .
( 2003 ) used a self-organizing map in enhancing the image quality of a 3D X-ray imaging system used in the inspection of solder joints .
Ong et al .
( 2008 ) introduced a technique which utilizes a camera with an orthogonal view in combination with one having an oblique view for inspecting the quality of solder joints .
They succeeded to categorize the joints into three different quality classes with no false classifications using learning vector quantization .
SVM Yun et al .
( 2000 ) compared k-means , back-propagation and support vector machines in the classification of solder joints in surface mounted devices , which were inspected by a circular illumination technique , with respect to the amount of solder present in the joints .
The support vector machine performed slightly better than the other two methods , reaching a rate of 96–100 % correct classifications within the classes .
PNN Sankaran et al .
( 1998 ) achieved a slight improvement over conventional back-propagation algorithm using a PNN-based approach called IMAGINET in classifying solder joint defects based on 2D images .
The proposed method was reported to achieve a rate of 75 % for correct classification of joints of ball grid array packages .
More recently , Liu et al .
( 2004 ) developed a system for inspecting flip-chip solder joints , which was based on analyzing ultrasound waveforms and which utilized probabilistic neural networks in the automated pattern recognition of soldering defects .
Their experimentations with the system produced a rate of 95 % correct classifications for 20 samples .
Fuzzy logic Pupin and Resadi ( 1994 ) reported on a machine that could be used in inspecting the quality of solder joints and presented new approaches to analyze the images of joints and a modern approach based on fuzzy theory to judge soldering defects .
Voci et al .
( 2002 ) developed a system based on fuzzy rules for detecting short circuits from X-ray images of printed circuit boards .
They managed to enhance the images by fuzzy filtering so that the detection of short circuits was facilitated .
Wei and Frantti ( 2002 ) presented online embedded software based on fuzzy logic for inspecting soldering defects in products for signal transmission .
Their system was able to improve the results of X-ray inspection by reducing false alarms by 44 % .
Furthermore , Chunquan et al .
( 2004 ) and Chunquan ( 2007 ) proposed an application based on fuzzy rules to the diagnosis of surface mounted solder joints .
The research was based on the theory on the 3D geometrical shape of solder joints .
Genetic algorithms The quality of solder joints in flip-chip packages was inspected by Saenthon and Kaitwanidvilai ( 2010 ) , who used genetic algorithms for enhancing the accuracy of their inspection system .
They managed to achieve a considerable reduction in the inspection errors when compared to those of conventional methods .
Hybrid intelligence Intelligent hybrid systems have become popular methods for inspecting solder joints .
Halgamuge and Glesner ( 1994 ) used a multilayer perceptron architecture known as FuNe I to generate fuzzy systems for different real world applications .
They used 3D surface information and 2D gray-level information from solder joint images , for instance , in distinguishing good solder joints from the bad ones automatically , reporting on a 99 % accuracy of classification .
Kim et al .
( 1996b ) used a back-propagation algorithm in classifying solder joints into four different types ( good , none , insufficient , excess solder ) and used an additional Bayesian classifier in unclear cases .
They reported on a performance of 98–100 % correct classifications within classes .
Ko and Cho ( 2000 ) presented a classification method consisting of two modules , of which one was based on an unsupervised LVQ classifier and the other on fuzzy set theory .
The purpose of the latter module was to correct possible misclassifications produced by the LVQ module .
The joints were classified into five categories and the method reached an accuracy of 96 % for test samples .
More recently , Acciani et al .
( 2006b ) introduced a diagnostic system based on using multilayer perceptrons and learning vector quantization in combination , which was used to analyze images of solder joints in integrated circuits .
They classified the joints into five classes ( from insufficient to excess amount of solder ) and managed to reach a recognition rate of as high as 99.5 % .
Giaquinto et al .
( 2009 ) presented a neurofuzzy method for analyzing soldering quality by evaluating each soldering on a five-degree scale , ranging from poor to excess solder .
Their methodology comprised three supervised MLP networks and two modules based on fuzzy rules and attained an overall recognition rate of 97.8 % .
Other applications There are also applications in which automated soldering is modeled for some other purpose than improving the quality of its outcome .
Modeling of the thermal profile of soldering is one existing application field .
Malave and Sastri ( 1992 ) used a neural network to model the pre-heat temperature and line speed of a wave solder machine using PCB design characteristics ( 15 variables ) as model inputs .
An MLP with two hidden layers and back-propagation training was selected for the modeling method .
The created network did not produce successful results , however .
The authors concluded that a better selection of design parameters and a larger amount of data would possibly improve the performance of their model .
Coit et al .
( 1994 ) and Coit , Jackson , and Smith ( 1998 ) used a back-propagating neural network to model the temperature profile of a wave soldering process with two preheating stages .
The results presented by Coit et al .
( 1994 ) showed that neural networks can overcome statistical methods such as linear and polynomial regression in the analysis of wave soldering .
The authors used both experimental and production data to predict the mean temperature , standard deviation and the rate of change at the wave .
Nonetheless , their data set was quite small , comprising 100 samples .
As a result , the precision for predicting mean temperature was relatively good , whereas the predictions for standard deviation and gradient were less precise .
Furthermore , Twomey and Smith ( 1996 ) extended the research of Coit et al .
( 1994 ) by developing an ANN-based approach for controlling the wave soldering process .
They used a neural network with back-propagation and divided the data differently to train and test sets in their experiments .
The data included four parameters to be used as inputs and the mean temperature of the wave to be used as model output .
The authors reported that a committee network , in which several networks are trained and the output is a combination of the outputs of all the networks , performed generally better than the other two networks tested , which were created using conventional train-and-test and re-substitution methods .
Tsai and Yang ( 2005 ) presented a two-layered back-propagating neural network for modeling the thermal profile of a reflow soldering process .
The authors predicted seven variables with regard to thermal profile using eight inputs , which were parameters of the soldering machine .
High correlations ( R > 0.99 ) between training data and model outputs were achieved .
Moreover , Tsai , Yang , and Hou ( 2005 ) presented a neurofuzzy system for controlling the thermal profile of reflow convection ovens , which utilized training vectors consisting of eight input elements in extracting rules which were then used to produce six responses with regard to thermal profile .
In addition , Tsai ( 2005 ) introduced an industrial application of intelligent knowledge-based system for controlling reflow soldering , which is based on knowledge extraction through neurofuzzy training and which can be used to determine process parameters and assess the outputs of a surface mount assembly line .
Data-based diagnosis of processes has become an essential part of process improvement in recent years , because archived process data have the potential for being used in optimization and improvement of productivity .
It seems that there is a constant need for new data-driven systems for process diagnosis , which can process even larger amounts of data and which can be used in process monitoring and analysis to improve the process and the quality of final products .
Computationally intelligent methods seem to provide a respectable option for analyzing historical process data in the production of electronics .
This work documents the application of computationally intelligent methods in mass soldering of electronics .
As the literature review indicates , the electronics industry has not adopted these methods on a larger scale and the processes of mass soldering of electronics , for instance , have been conventionally analyzed using simple statistical methods .
The only application field in which computationally intelligent methods have been used more widely has been the inspection of solder joints after soldering .
It seems , however , that intelligent methods are becoming more important also in the electronics industry .
Recent trends indicate an increasing awareness as ever more people are using computational intelligence for problem solving also in electronics manufacturing .
The earliest intelligent applications to mass soldering originate from the early 1990s ( see Fig 2 ) , including the application of methods such as multilayer perceptrons , probabilistic neural networks , self-organizing maps , fuzzy logic and also the first hybrid methods .
As a matter of fact , at the beginning of the 1990s the research has been quite active in this field , whereas a reduction can be seen in the published literature at the turn of the century .
Nonetheless , it seems that the range of computational methods has been widened in the 21st century as new methods such as support vectors machines , rough sets , decision trees and genetic algorithms have become a part of the research .
Moreover , it seems that the number of applications has increased in the last five years .
Quality management is the main application field of computational intelligence when it comes to mass soldering of electronics .
As it is illustrated in Fig 3 , especially the inspection of solder joints forms a major group within the applications , comprising 32 applications .
Nonetheless , this far the use of CI in other tasks of quality management such as the prediction and optimization of quality has not been common to the producers , as only 12 applications have been reported .
Furthermore , there are only seven applications related to other process improvement tasks such as the modeling of thermal profile of soldering processes .
Multilayer perceptrons have been the mostly used intelligent method , covering approximately 50 % of the applications , as can be seen in Fig 4 .
Applications of self-organizing maps , fuzzy methods and hybrid methods have also been reported , but the use of methods other than these has been only marginal .
82 % of the applications utilize artificial neural networks , if the applications of hybrid methods are included .
The main conclusion of the survey is that computationally intelligent methods could be used in the electronics industry on a much larger scale than they are today .
As the results presented in the literature suggest , they provide an efficient way of analyzing data in the electronics industry .
They can reveal mutual interactions which are otherwise difficult to find , improve the goodness of models and decrease the number of variables needed for modeling or testing .
Intelligent methods can also offer a useful way of analyzing large data sets and provide a practical platform for representing them visually .
Perhaps the most important thing is , however , that they are applicable to generic data-based applications , which facilitates their implementation in the electronics industry .
In summary , the main findings in the literature show that data-based intelligent methods offer several advantages over the statistical methods .
They • Enable the detection of multivariate dependencies .
• Enable the detection of nonlinear dependencies .
• Offer improvement of prediction models .
• Offer new illustrative ways of visualizing multivariate interactions .
• Provide a more efficient way of solving problems .
• Enable more efficient diagnoses of processes .
• Provide an adaptive platform for intelligent applications .
Quality management has been the main application field of computational intelligence in the electronics production and it seems that it will also remain such in the near future .
Quality of electronic products will be an ever more important issue in the future and the challenges faced by the electronics industry today will force the manufacturers to search for new computational methods which are able to comply with those challenges .
In this respect , a probable application area of interest is process diagnostics and obtaining reasons for bad quality .
Moreover , computational intelligence would be extremely useful in predictive systems , which could be used in estimating the produced quality in the future .
In addition , the inspection and recognition of soldering defects will remain an important application area .
Archived process history contains valuable information on the behavior of processes in the past .
Optimization of process parameters is therefore another potential future application field .
Computational intelligence could be utilized in high-level control systems , which would suggest the use of certain parameters based on previous knowledge as new products are introduced in the production , for example .
Perhaps the best profit , in this respect , would be achieved in the form of expert systems , in which expert human knowledge is combined with artificial intelligence and experimental data .