This paper proposes a heart disease diagnosis system using rough sets based attribute reduction and interval type-2 fuzzy logic system ( IT2FLS ) .
The integration between rough sets based attribute reduction and IT2FLS aims to handle with high-dimensional dataset challenge and uncertainties .
IT2FLS utilizes a hybrid learning process comprising fuzzy c-mean clustering algorithm and parameters tuning by chaos firefly and genetic hybrid algorithms .
This learning process is computationally expensive , especially when employed with high-dimensional dataset .
The rough sets based attribute reduction using chaos firefly algorithm is investigated to find optimal reduction which therefore reduces computational burden and enhances performance of IT2FLS .
Experiment results demonstrate a significant dominance of the proposed system compared to other machine learning methods namely Naive Bayers , support vector machines , and artificial neural network .
The proposed model is thus useful as a decision support system for heart disease diagnosis .
Heart disease has significantly increased over the last decade and has become the leading cause of death for people in most countries around the world .
There are many features of heart disease affecting the structure or function of the heart .
These might be difficult for doctors to diagnose quickly and accurately .
Therefore , it is necessary to employ computerized technologies in heart disease diagnosis to assist doctors to diagnose faster with higher accurately .
Currently , there are many heart disease diagnosis systems relying on soft computing techniques that have been proposed .
In particular , integrating the use of several soft computing techniques to generate hybrid models have been investigated in order to perform better than a single technique .
These models usually consisted of two states .
In the first state , feature selection techniques are applied to select subset of features .
The obtained subset of features is subsequently used as input for the classification techniques in the second state ( Avci , 2009 ; Guan , Gray , & Leyffer , 2009 ; Khemphila & Boonjing , 2011 ; Nahar , Tasadduq , Kevin , & Yi-Ping , 2013 ; Sanz et al. , 2013 ; Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) .
Due to many features of heart datasets , which contain relevant as well as irrelevant and redundant features .
Irrelevant features do not influence description of the target class .
Redundant features do not contribute to anything but they make noise towards description of target class ( Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) .
Those features not only affect the results of classification but also make the system run slowly .
Therefore , removing those features before applying classifier techniques is necessary .
For this purpose , attribute reduction or feature selection is needed in the heart disease diagnosis system .
This reduces the risk of over fitting , improves generalization ability of the model , provides better predictability , and requires less computation causing smaller features ( Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) .
Many researchers have investigated feature selection techniques for heart disease diagnosis in past literature .
Guan et al .
( 2009 ) proposed a feature selection based on support vector machine for medical datasets .
For the SPECTF dataset , experiments shown when 12 out of 44 features were selected and accuracy of the proposed model was 76.5 % .
Moreover , the proposed model was compared to the standard support vector machine ( SVM ) , recursive feature elimination ( RFE ) – SVM , L1-norm SVM , and two approximated L0-norm SVM methods .
The results showed that their proposed model outperformed the other models in terms of accuracy .
Shilaskar and Ghatol ( 2013 ) proposed a heart disease diagnosis system consisting of feature selection and classification techniques .
SVM classifier was combined with forward feature inclusion , back-elimination feature selection and forward feature selection for three datasets from the UCI datasets namely Arrhythmia , SPECTF and Heart Disease datasets .
Experimental results demonstrated that the feature selections improved accurately classification techniques and reduced the number of input variables .
For the SPECTF dataset , accuracy of SVM increased 3 % from 75 % to 78 % and the number of features reduced significantly from 44 to 19 features .
For the heart disease dataset , the accuracy of SVM increased 4 % from 81 % to 85 % and the number of feature reduced from 10 to 4 features .
Shao , Hou , and Chiu ( 2014 ) used logistic regression , multivariate adaptive regression splines and rough set techniques as feature selection to reduce the set of explanatory features for heart disease diagnosis .
The remaining features were used as input for artificial neural network .
The heart disease dataset form UCI datasets was used to train and test the models .
The experiments showed that all of those techniques reduced the sets of features and improved classification performance .
However , logistic regression only reduced one feature and increased approximately 2 % of accuracy .
For the rough set approach , this research used the greedy heuristics algorithm in the rough set exploration system ( RESE ) .
The result reduced two features and improved approximately 3 % of accuracy .
Multivariate adaptive regression splines combined with artificial neural network is the best system in this research , which achieved 82.14 % accuracy with reduced 7 features .
Inbarani , Azar , and Jothi ( 2014 ) proposed a hybrid system which combined rough sets based feature selection using particle swarm optimization ( PSO ) and classification techniques for medical diagnosis .
In this study , PSO based relative reduction and PSO based quick reduction were investigated to find optimal features .
Then the results were used as input of Naïve Bayer , BayesNet and KStar techniques to classifier medical datasets .
This proposed model was evaluated using Erythematic , Prognostic Breast Cancer , SPECTF datasets from UCI Repository for machine learning .
The results illustrated that attribute reduction of both PSO based relative reduction and PSO based quick reduction achieved 15 out of 44 attributes and accuracy of the best classification technique namely Naive Bayer was approximate 88 % for SPECTF dataset .
However , this proposed approach did not select optimal number of attributes .
Nguyen , Abbas , Douglas , and Saeid ( 2015a ) proposed a medical diagnosis system which were combined genetic fuzzy logic system with wavelet .
The wavelet transformation was employed to extract discriminative features for high-dimensional datasets .
Then fuzzy standard additive trained by genetic algorithm ( GSAM ) was applied to classifier medical dataset .
This proposed model was evaluated using Wisconsin breast cancer and Cleveland heart disease datasets from UCI Repository for machine learning .
The results shown that GSAM became highly capable when deployed with small number of wavelet features as its computational burden was reduced .
However , this proposed approach had a shortcoming regarding selection of the optimal number of wavelet features and the accuracy of this proposed model was 78.78 % for Cleveland heart disease datasets .
Nguyen , Abbas , Douglas , and Saeid ( 2015b ) proposed an automated medical data classification using wavelet transformation ( WT ) and interval type-2 fuzzy logic system ( IT2FLS ) .
Fuzzy c-mean clustering algorithm was used to construct fuzzy rule based of the fuzzy system and genetic algorithm was applied to tune parameter of the fuzzy system .
The WT was used to find a reduction of features therefore that reduces computational burden and enhances performance of IT2FLS .
The proposed model was measured using Wisconsin breast cancer and Cleveland heart disease datasets from UCI Repository for machine learning .
Results demonstrated a significant dominance of the wavelet–IT2FLS approach compared to other machine learning methods including probabilistic neural network , support vector machine , fuzzy ARTMAP , and adaptive neuron-fuzzy inference system .
However , this proposed approach did not select optimal number of features and the accuracy of this proposed model was 81.01 % for Cleveland heart disease datasets .
From the literature above , there are several limitations with existing models that can be resolved .
Feature selection methods applied in the existing methods were heuristic feature selection .
Those methods only considered heuristically selecting the subset of features , but redundant features may still remain and was not the best subset of features .
Therefore , finding out the best minimal subset of features is needed .
Recently , rough sets theory has been applied as a tool to discover data dependencies and reduce the number of attributes in inconsistent datasets ( Pawlak , 1991 ) .
Rough sets are applied to attribute reduction to remove redundant attributes and select subsets of significant attributes , which lead to better prediction accuracy and speed than systems using original sets of attributes .
Traditionally , greedy heuristics was applied to find attribute reductions based on rough sets ( Hoa , 1996 ; Shi , Liu , & Zheng , 2004 ; Velayutham & Thangavel , 2011 ) .
Those approaches are quite fast .
However , these may meet the problem of heuristic feature selection .
Another alternative approach for attribute reduction based on rough sets is applied meta heuristic algorithms to find the best minimal attribute reduction ( Inbarani et al. , 2014 ; Wang , Yang , Teng , Xia , & Jensen , 2007 ; Ye , Chen , & Ma , 2013 ) .
Firefly algorithm ( FA ) is one of the recent swarm intelligent techniques proposed by Yang ( 2008 ) and is a meta heuristic algorithm that relies on flashing behavior of fireflies in nature to find global optimal solution in search space for special problems .
FA has been successfully applied to a large number of difficult combinational optimization problems as well as NP-hard problems ( Yang , 2008 ) .
Furthermore , particle swarm optimization ( PSO ) is just a special class of the firefly algorithms .
In addition , the firefly algorithm is much more efficient in finding the global optima with higher success rates than PSO and genetic algorithms ( GAs ) ( Yang , 2009 ) .
Therefore , firefly algorithm is applied in this research to combine rough sets for attribute reduction .
Hence , the main objective of this paper is to propose an efficiently heart disease diagnosis model to predict heart disease more accurately with reduced number of attributes .
In the proposed model , the chaos firefly algorithm combined with rough sets is introduced to reduce the set of attributes .
The remaining subsets of attributes are used as inputs for the type-2 fuzzy logic system .
Furthermore , two comparisons are investigated in this research .
Firstly , the rough sets based attribute reductions using the chaos firefly algorithm compared to the rough sets based attribute reductions using the binary particle swarm optimization .
Secondly , type-2 fuzzy logic system compared to three well-known classification techniques namely Naive Bayes , support vector machine and artificial neural network .
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows : State-of-the-art systems are introduced in Section 2 .
Methodology is illustrated in Section 3 .
Experiment results and comparison of differential models are covered in Section 4 .
Finally , conclusions are summarized in Section 5 .
This section summarizes state of the art of heart disease diagnosis systems .
Identified problems and suggested solutions for these problems are introduced in this section .
Furthermore , the theoretical foundations are also given in this section .
Literature reviews Recently , many soft computing techniques have been proposed for heart disease diagnosis .
The heart disease diagnosis system usually includes two main components : feature selection and classification .
In the feature selection component , a smaller number of meaningful features that best represents the given dataset without irrelevant and redundant attributes are selected .
The selected subset of attributes is subsequently used as input for the classification techniques in the second components .
The classification is carried out , i.e. , each patient is assigned to specific class according to the characteristic features selected for it ( Avci , 2009 ; Guan et al. , 2009 ; Khemphila & Boonjing , 2011 ; Nahar et al. , 2013 ; Sanz et al. , 2013 ; Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) .
The existing heart disease diagnosis is depicted in Fig 1 .
State of the art of heart disease diagnosis system Fig 1 .
State of the art of heart disease diagnosis system .
Many feature selection techniques have been applied to diagnosis systems of heart disease .
Khemphila and Boonjing ( 2011 ) used information gain techniques to select subsets of features .
The obtained selected features were subsequently used for artificial neural network to classifier patients .
Jabbar , Deekshatulu , and Chandra ( 2013 ) proposed a heart disease diagnosis system .
In this system , genetic searches were used to evaluate attributes .
Subsets of attributes with higher ranking of attributes were selected .
Then , selected subsets of attributes were used for the K-nearest neighbor classification technique .
Shilaskar and Ghatol ( 2013 ) investigated a heart disease diagnosis system using feature selection techniques combined with support vector machine .
In this system , forward feature inclusion , back-elimination feature selection and forward feature selection were used and compared to others .
Shao et al .
( 2014 ) used logistic regression , multivariate adaptive regression splines and rough set techniques as feature selection to reduce the set of explanatory features for heart disease diagnosis .
Most of these feature selection techniques can be categorized into two types : filter and wrapper techniques .
Filter techniques use statistical properties of features to remove the less important feature from datasets .
In most cases a feature relevance score is computed and ranked , and low scoring features are eliminated ( Unler , Murat , & Chinnam , 2011 ) .
For instance , Information gain , Gain ratio , Relief algorithms , etc .
Advantages of filter techniques are that they can easily process very high-dimensional datasets .
They are computationally efficient , and independent of the classification algorithm .
However , a common disadvantage of the filter technique is that each feature is separately considered .
Dependencies of features are not considered which may lead to worse classification performance .
Wrapper techniques , in contrast , classification techniques are used and subsets of features are selected relying on the prediction performance ( Unler et al. , 2011 ) .
The main advantage of wrapper techniques over filter techniques is their prediction accuracy .
Searching for the best feature selection with wrapper techniques are guided by prediction accuracy of classification .
Therefore , these results are generally more promising than the results of filter techniques ( Unler et al. , 2011 ) .
However , there are several drawbacks with wrapper techniques .
Common drawbacks of those techniques are higher risk of over fitting and very computationally intensive as well as not effective for high-dimensional databases .
Furthermore , both filter and wrapper techniques only consider the best subset of features without the best minimal subset of features .
Rough sets were introduced as a mathematical tool to handle the analysis of imprecise , uncertain or incomplete information or knowledge .
At the heart of rough sets is the idea of only discovery data dependency , thus unlike many other methods , probability distribution information or assignments are not required ( Pawlak , 1991 ) .
There are many rough sets methods that have been proposed for attribute reduction in past literature .
Generally , there are two categories of rough set methods for attribute reduction , greedy heuristics and meta heuristic algorithms .
Greedy heuristics can be applied to find attribute reductions based on rough sets .
These approaches are very fast .
However , they may meet the problem of heuristic feature selection .
Meta-heuristic algorithms are an alternative approach to find the best minimal attribute reduction .
There are various meta heuristic techniques that can be used to alleviate this problem .
Genetic algorithms ( GAs ) have been applied to search for minimal subset of attributes ( Wroblewski , 1995 ) .
However , GAs can not guarantee minimal subset of attributes .
In addition , problems may arise when employing GAs for situations of high-dimensional dataset , as the amount of time taken to discover attribute reductions may increase significantly .
Another approach similar to GAs is particle swarm optimization ( Wang et al. , 2007 ) , which does not require operations such as crossover and mutation , but primitive and simple mathematical operators , and is also efficient in terms of time complexity .
PSO will also not guarantee minimal attribute reductions discovered but like GAs able to search local minima .
Similar to PSO , the firefly algorithm also does not require operations such crossover and mutation .
It requires simple mathematical operators , and is computationally inexpensive in terms of both memory and runtime .
PSO is just a special class of the firefly algorithms ( Yang , 2009 ) .
In addition , the firefly algorithm is much more efficient in finding the global optima with higher success rates than PSO and genetic algorithms ( Yang , 2009 ) .
Recently , many classification techniques have been applied to diagnosis systems for heart disease such as K-nearest neighbor techniques ( Jabbar et al. , 2013 ) , support vector machine ( Nahar et al. , 2013 ; Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) , artificial neural network ( Khemphila & Boonjing , 2011 ) .
In real world applications and in performance of any system , uncertainties are usually presented .
However , these classifications are not able to handle uncertainties that include measurements and data used .
Currently , the type-2 fuzzy logic system is able to deal with different forms of uncertainties ( Mendel , 2001 ) .
It has been successfully used in classification and prediction .
The results have been promising and very encouraging ( Fazel Zarandi , Faraji , & Karbasian , 2012 ; Fazel Zarandi , Rezaee , Turksen , & Neshat , 2009 ; Long & Meesad , 2014 ; Mendel , 2001 ) .
Hence , from the identified problems above , this research suggests a solution for these problems in both components of heart disease diagnosis .
Chaos firefly and rough sets based attribute reduction are used to replace the feature selection component .
Moreover , the type-2 fuzzy logic system is used in the classification component .
Architecture of the suggested solution is shown in Fig 2 .
Methodologies of the proposed heart disease diagnosis are further explained in a later section .
Architecture of the proposed heart disease diagnosis system Fig 2 .
Architecture of the proposed heart disease diagnosis system .
Foundation of rough sets Rough sets theory was introduced in the early 1980s by Pawlak ( 1991 ) .
This is used for the research of intelligent systems characterized by uncertain or vague information .
Rough sets have been successfully applied in artificial intelligences particular in the areas of knowledge discovery , machine learning , decision support systems ( Pawlak , 1997 ) .
Attribute reduction is one of the major concerns in the research of rough sets theory .
In this study , general concepts of rough sets theory are summarized as follows : Central to rough sets is the notion of indiscernibility .
Let a decision table , where is non-empty finite set of objects called the universe of discourse , is a non-empty finite set of condition attributes , is a decision attribute .
determine an function where is the set of values of a. if , the P-Indiscernibility relation is denoted by is defined as : ( 1 ) The partition of U generated by IND ( P ) is denoted by U/P .
If , x and y are said to be indiscernibility with respect to P. The equivalence classes of the P-indiscernibility relation are denoted by .
The indiscernibility relation is the mathematical basic notion of rough sets theory .
( 2 ) where the equivalence classes are numbered such that .
Given a decision table let and , X could be approximated by the lower and upper approximation-lower and P-upper approximation of set X , is denoted by PX and , respectively , are defined as : ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Let , be equivalence relations over U , then the positive , negative and boundary regions , denoted , respectively , can be defined as : ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) A set is said to be rough ( imprecise ) if its boundary region is non-empty ; otherwise , the set is crisp .
An important issue in data analysis is determining the dependencies of attributes .
In decision table , the degree of dependency between condition and decision attribute can be defined as follows : Given a decision table , let , we say that D depends on P in a degree k ( ) , denoted by , is determined by ( 8 ) where is called the quality of approximation of classification , induced by the set of decision attributes ( Pawlak , 1997 ) .
If k = 1 , D depends totally on P ; if D depends partially on P , if k = 0 , D is not depends on P. Decision table DT is consistent if otherwise DT is inconsistent .
denotes the cardinality of a set .
Generally , there often exist redundant condition attributes .
So , these redundant attributes can be eliminated without losing essential classificatory information ( Pawlak , 1997 ) .
The goal of attribute reduction is to eliminate redundant attributes leading to the reduced set that provides the same quality of classification as the original dataset .
A given decision table may have many attribute reductions , the set of all attribute reductions are defined in Eq ( 9 ) as ( 9 ) A set of minimal reductions is defined as ( 10 ) Finding a minimal attribute reduction for a given dataset is a NP-hard problem ( Ye et al. , 2013 ) .
Therefore , developing an efficient algorithm for this problem is a challenging task .
Based on those concepts of rough sets , an appropriate fitness function of the firefly algorithm corresponding to the problem is further defined .
This is covered in a later section .
Chaos firefly algorithm Firefly algorithm is an effective and successful in optimizing continuous optimization problems ( Fister , Fister , Yang , & Janez , 2013 ) as well as discrete optimization problems ( Chandrasekaran , Simon , & Padhy , 2013 ; Sayadi , Hafezalkotob , & Naini , 2013 ) .
In addition , many researchers have suggested that the firefly algorithm is superior to both particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithms in terms of both efficiency and success rate ( Fister et al. , 2013 ; Long & Meesad , 2014 ; Yang , 2009 ) .
In this section , basic concepts of chaos firefly algorithm are introduced .
The firefly algorithm ( FA ) is one of the swarm intelligence techniques introduced by Yang ( 2008 ) .
This is a kind of stochastic , meta heuristic algorithm to find the global optimal solution in search space to solve optimization problems as well as NP-hard problems .
This algorithm is inspired by the flashing light of fireflies in nature .
The firefly algorithm reflects a physical formula of light intensity of firefly found in nature .
The main ideas of the firefly algorithm is interpreting light intensity characteristics as follows ( Fister et al. , 2013 ; Yang , 2009 ) : – All fireflies are unisex and there may be an attractive in any two fireflies .
– Their attractiveness is proportional to their light intensity .
A firefly with lower light intensity will move toward the fireflies with higher light intensity .
If there is not firefly with higher light intensity , the firefly will randomly move in search space .
– The light intensity of a firefly is determined by fitness function .
In the firefly algorithm , there are three important issues : Attraction function and movement of fireflies .
• Attraction function : The main structure of the attractiveness function can be any monotonically decreasing function such as the following generalized form Yang ( 2009 ) : ( 11 ) where is distance between two fireflies i and j respectively .
Euclidean distance is applied in this research .
is an attraction parameter that is the attractiveness at r = 0 and , γ is a light absorption coefficient .
The attraction parameters and light absorption coefficient are two important parameters .
The values of those parameters determine the speed of convergence and the behavior of firefly algorithm .
By tuning these parameters using chaos map , the solution quality has been improved ( Gandomi , Yang , Talatahari , & Alavi , 2013 ) .
There are many kind of chaos in literature ( Gandomi et al. , 2013 ; He et al. , 2001 ) can applied to tune these parameters .
Gandomi et al .
( 2013 ) indicated that only the attraction parameter was tuned by Gaussian map resulting in the best firefly algorithm .
The Gaussian map for the attraction parameter is determined in Eq ( 12 ) ( Gandomi et al. , 2013 ; He , He , Jiang , Zhu , & Hu , 2001 ) .
( 12 ) where is value of attraction parameter at time step .
At , is randomly generated in uniformly distributed in [ 0 , 1 ] .
This map also generates chaotic sequences in ( 0 , 1 ) .
• Movement of fireflies The positions of fireflies with lower light intensity move toward fireflies with higher light intensity by Eq ( 13 ) as following .
( 13 ) where and are positions of firefly i with lower light intensity and firefly j with higher intensity at time t respectively , is a random parameter which determines randomly behavior of movement of fireflies , is a random number generator uniformly distributed in [ 0 , 1 ] .
For more details of the firefly algorithm it can be seen in Yang ( 2009 ) and Gandomi et al .
( 2013 ) .
The detailed design diagnosis system of heart disease consists of three major states ( see Fig 2 ) : Normalization , chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction , and build type-2 fuzzy logic system .
Input dataset is brought into the system that is first normalized to the interval [ 0 , 1 ] .
Then chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction method is applied to select optimal subset of attributes which therefore reduces computational burden and enhances performance of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system .
The obtained dataset with subset of attributes is divided into two subsets : training dataset and testing dataset .
The training dataset is used to build interval type-2 fuzzy logic system while the testing dataset is used to test the obtained interval type-2 fuzzy logic system .
The details of each module are discussed in the following subsections .
Normalization Normalization is applied to avoid numerical difficulties during computation process , as well as to prevent feature values in grater numeric ranges from dominating those in smaller numeric ranges ( Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) .
There are so many data normalization methods .
A popular method , min–max normalization is applied in this research .
Min–max normalization maps a value v of original dataset to v′ in range of by calculating Eq ( 14 ) ( 14 ) where define the range of transform dataset .
and are applied in this research .
After normalization , transformed datasets are used for attribute reduction method .
The detailed algorithm for attribute reduction is introduced in next subsection .
Chaos firefly and rough sets based attribute reduction Given a dataset , if there are m total condition attributes , there will be subsets of attributes .
Those subsets differ from each other in the length and attributes contained in each subset .
Finding an optimal attribute reduction is NP-hard problem ( Ye et al. , 2013 ) .
There are many techniques based on meta heuristic algorithms and rough sets have been proposed in part literature to find attribute reduction ( Wang et al. , 2007 ; Ye et al. , 2013 ) .
In those methods , the fitness functions based on quality of approximation of classification .
A solution was highest value of fitness function .
The value of quality of approximation of classification in the solution may not equal to 1 .
As a results , the solution may not an attribute reduction .
In addition , those fitness functions may not consider minimal attribute reduction .
To solve this problem , this research proposes chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction .
Each subset of attribute can be seen as a point or position of a firefly in search space .
In which , each attribute in subset is a dimension of search space .
The optimal position is the subset of attributes with least length and highest classification quality .
The goals of fireflies are to fly to the best position .
The process of chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction is depicted in Fig 3 .
Process of rough sets based feature selection using discrete chaos firefly… Fig 3 .
Process of rough sets based feature selection using discrete chaos firefly algorithm .
There are three important considerations of application of chaos firefly algorithm in attribute reduction .
The first consideration is the encoding method i.e .
to represent an attribute reduction by a firefly .
Second important consideration is fitness function .
Another consideration is binary code of the chaos firefly algorithm for attribute reduction problem .
• Encoding method A possible solution of the problem ( an attribute reduction ) is represented by a firefly as binary strings of length m ( ) .
In those binary strings , every bit represents an attribute , the value ‘ 1 ’ illustrates that the corresponding attribute is selected while the value ‘ 0 ’ demonstrates that the corresponding attribute is not selected .
For example , suppose that and a firefly , then an attribute reduction is .
• Fitness function There are many existing definitions of fitness function based on rough sets for the problem in past literature ( Inbarani et al. , 2014 ; Wang et al. , 2007 ) .
These fitness functions may considered by correctness of attribute reduction without minimal reductions ( Ye et al. , 2013 ) .
In order to find the best minimal attribute reduction , it is necessary to apply a fitness function that not only considers reduction of attribute ( quality of approximation classification ) but also considers minimal attribute reduction .
For this purpose , a fitness function , is defined in Eq ( 15 ) , ( Ye et al. , 2013 ) is applied in this research .
( 15 ) where is quality of classification .
R is a reduct of condition attribute C , R is computed by an supervise quick reduction algorithm ( Velayutham & Thangavel , 2011 ) .
if the decision table DT is consistent and if not where and | | are computed using Eq ( 2 ) .
This formula means that the classification quality , , and length of attributes subset , , have different significance for attribute reduction task .
The goodness of position of each firefly is evaluated by this fitness function .
The goal of firefly is to fly to position with maximized fitness values .
• Binary code of firefly algorithm for attribute reduction problem In attribute reduction problem , binary number 1 and 0 are used to indicate that corresponding attribute is or is not selected .
So , rough sets based attribute reduction is a discrete problem .
The original firefly algorithm is able to deal with continuous problems .
Therefore , modifications of this algorithm are needed to enable it to handle binary problem .
In the firefly algorithm , the Eq ( 13 ) shows firefly i with lower light intensity moving towards firefly j with higher light intensity , the position of firefly i changes as a real number .
So this number needs to be replaced by a binary number .
For this purpose , a sigmoid function can be applied ( Sayadi et al. , 2013 ) .
However , in order to improve the firefly algorithm , a tanh function is used in this research ( Chandrasekaran et al. , 2013 ) .
The tanh function is defined in Eq ( 16 ) as : ( 16 ) where n is number of fireflies in population , m is number of dimensions .
This function scales the value in the [ 0 , 1 ] range .
The final value of each part of fireflies after movement is determined by : If then ; otherwise , , where is a random number generator uniformly distributed in [ 0 , 1 ] .
Algorithm 1 .
Pseudo code of the chaos firefly and rough sets based attribute reduction algorithm Input Decision table where is a set of condition attributes ; D : decision attribute ; is non-empty finite set of objects ; Output //S is the best minimal attribute reduction 1 .
Generate initial population of fireflies ; 2 .
Objective function 3 .
Light intensity Ii at Xi is determined by 4 .
Definition the firefly algorithm parameters : ; 5 .
Compute an attribute reduction based on supervised quick reduct algorithm ( Velayutham & Thangavel , 2011 ) ; 6. while do 7 .
Tune attractive parameter , , based on Eq ( 12 ) ; 8 .
Evaluate light intensity of fireflies using objective function in Eq ( 15 ) ; 9 .
Ranking light intensity of fireflies ; 10 .
Find the current best solution , S ; 11 .
For i = 1 to n do 12 .
For j = 1 to n do 13 .
If 14 .
Compute attractiveness function , , based on Eq ( 11 ) ; 15 .
Vary the position of firefly i , in m-dimension according to Eq ( 13 ) ; 16 .
Compute value of tanh function , f based on Eq ( 16 ) ; 17 .
If f 18. end if 19. end for 20. end for 21 .
Post process results ; Based on pseudo code of firefly algorithm ( Yang , 2009 ) and three important considerations above , the pseudo code of the chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction is proposed which is shown in Algorithm 1 .
The objective of this algorithm is to find a subset of attributes with least length and highest quality of classification .
The optimal subset of attributes is subsequently used to build ( train ) and test the type-2 fuzzy logic system .
The method of building the fuzzy logic system is further introduced in the next subsection as follows .
Building type-2 fuzzy logic system In recent years , type-2 fuzzy logic system has been successfully applied to many application areas , such as engineering , modeling and control , classification , forecasting ( Fazel Zarandi et al. , 2009 ; Long & Meesad , 2014 ; Mendel , 2001 ; Mendel , John , & Liu , 2006 ; Zhao , LI , & Cao , 2012 ) .
Especially , this can be very beneficial when lots of uncertainties are presented in the systems ( Mendel , 2001 ) .
This research considers an interval type-2 Takagi–Sugeno–Kang fuzzy logic system ( IT2 TSK FLS ) having p inputs and one output .
That can be described fuzzy IF-THEN rules that present input–output relations of a system consisting of m rules , each having p antecedents , the ith rule can be expressed in Eq ( 17 ) ( Mendel , 2001 ) .
( 17 ) where are interval type-2 antecedent fuzzy sets ( A2 ) , are consequent type-1 fuzzy set ( C1 ) , denotes the center ( mean ) of , and denotes the spread of ; output of the rule , is also interval type-1 fuzzy set , This fuzzy logic system is called A2-C1 IT2 TSK FLS ( Mendel , 2001 ) .
However , in order to apply the type-2 fuzzy logic system to real applications , design of the fuzzy logic system is necessary .
The automatic design of the fuzzy logic system is nowadays an open research topic .
Designing an optimal type-2 fuzzy logic system is a very difficult task .
One needs to determine the structure of fuzzy rule-base , the number of fuzzy rule-bases and suitable parameters of the fuzzy logic system .
To obtain the desirable number of fuzzy rules and structure of fuzzy Rule-Base , fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm ( Bezdek , 1981 ) is used as a projection from clusters .
In addition , the chaos firefly and genetic hybrid algorithms ( Long & Meesad , 2014 ) are applied to find the suitable parameters of the fuzzy logic system .
For more details of the design of this fuzzy logic system , readers can read ( Long & Meesad , 2014 ) .
After training the type-2 fuzzy logic system , the obtained type-2 fuzzy logic system model is evaluated by the testing dataset with optimal subset of attributes .
Simulations of the proposed model are introduced in the next section .
In this section , simulations of the proposed heart disease diagnosis are performed .
The objective of the proposed model is to predict heart disease patients with high accurately and less time complexity .
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model , two kinds of comparisons are investigated in this research .
First of all , the chaos firefly algorithm and rough sets based attribute reduction ( CFARS-AR ) are compared to binary particle swarm optimization and rough sets based attribute reduction ( BPSORS-AR ) .
Secondly , type-2 fuzzy logic system ( new approach ) is also compared to three well-known classifier techniques namely Naive Bayes ( NB ) , Support Vector Machine ( SVM ) , and Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) .
Selected datasets In this research , two well-known benchmark balanced dataset and unbalanced dataset from UCI Repository Machine Learning Database ( Bache & Lichman , 2013 ) were used to evaluate models .
• Heart disease dataset ( catalog ) included the records of 270 people .
Each record consisted of 13 attributes and one classification attribute .
The dataset consisted of two classifications .
The first classification had 150 records ; second one had 120 records .
• SPECTF dataset consisted of 44 attributes and one classification attribute which represented the image that is given for 267 images with 55 belonging to class 0 and 221 belonging to class 1 .
Description suggests 80 samples to be used for training ( 40 samples belonging to class 0 and 40 sample belonging to class 1 ) and 187 samples for testing ( 172 samples belonging to class 0 and 25 belonging to class 1 ) .
More details of datasets can be seen in Bache and Lichman ( 2013 ) .
Parameters setup Chaos firefly algorithm , binary particle swarm optimization and rough sets based attribute reduction were implemented in MATLAB .
In the experiments , the parameters , except when indicated differently , were set to the following values : Initially , 25 individuals are randomly generated in a population and the number of generations is equal to 100 for both algorithms .
For the firefly algorithm For binary particle swarm optimization , the binary particle swarm optimization ( Mirjalili & Lewis , 2013 ) is used in this research .
.
All of Naive Bayes , SVM , and ANN were trained and tested in Weka 3.7.10 .
For Naive Bayes , use Kernel Estimator is applied .
In SVM , radial basic function ( RBF ) of kernel function and absorption coefficient ( C ) = 0 , are applied in this research .
For ANN , an extension of the standard multilayer perception ( multilayer Perceptron CS ) with default parameters providing in the Weka are used .
Performance evaluation To provide a comparison among well-known classification techniques , three evaluation techniques were used in this research : Accuracy , Sensitivity and Specificity .
Those evaluation techniques are defined as follows : Accuracy : This is the most popularly used standard for evaluation classification techniques as well as comparison of their performance defined by Eq ( 18 ) .
( 18 ) Sensitivity and specificity are statistical measure of how well a binary classification test correctly .
The sensitivity is used to evaluate the true positive rate while specificity is used to determine false negative rate .
( 19 ) ( 20 ) where TP and FP are the number of true positive and false positive , respectively ; TN and FN are the number of true and false negative , respectively .
Results and discussion After normalization , the transformed datasets are used for attribute reduction methods .
The firefly algorithm and the particle swarm optimization for attribute reduction MATLAB code ran 30 times with different initial solutions .
Results of attribute reduction methods are shown in Table 1 .
The original and datasets with subset of the attributes reduction from attribute reduction methods are used to train and test the models .
The experimental results of all four classifier models combined with attribute reductions are shown in Table 2 , which represents the accuracy , sensitively and specificity of performance of the models .
Table 1 .
Results of attribute reduction methods .
Datasets No .
of all attributes BPSORS-AR CFARS-AR ( proposed model ) Minimal number of attribute in subsets Average number of attributes in subsets Average running time ( second ) Minimal number of attribute in subsets Average number of attributes in subsets Average running time ( second ) Heart disease 13 4 4 346.56 4 4 331.79 SPECTF 44 4 4 425.67 3 3.64 370.00 Table 2 .
Comparison performance of combination classifier models with and without attribute reduction ( Acc : Accuracy ; Sen : Sensitivity ; Spe : Specificity ) .
Datasets Models Without attribute reductions BPSORS-AR CFARS-AR Acc ( % ) Sen ( % ) Spe ( % ) Acc ( % ) Sen ( % ) Spe ( % ) Acc ( % ) Sen ( % ) Spe ( % ) Heart disease Naive Bayes 83.3 826 839 79.6 87 74.2 85.2 82.6 87.1 SVM 75.9 78.3 74.2 75.9 78.3 74.2 81.5 82.6 80.6 ANN 77.8 82.6 74.2 74.1 78.3 71 81.5 82.6 80.6 New approach 86 87.1 90 87.0 93.3 79.2 88.3 84.9 93.3 SPECTF Naive Bayes 77.5 85.2 47.4 79.7 100.0 0.0 79.7 100.0 0.0 SVM 79.7 100.0 0.0 79.7 100.0 0.0 79.7 100.0 0.0 ANN 73.3 76.5 60.5 77.0 91.3 21.1 77.0 89.3 28.9 New approach 79.1 85.5 63.4 81.8 84.3 53.3 87.2 94.2 68.9 According to Table 1 , it can be seen that the discrete chaos firefly algorithm is faster than the binary particle swarm optimization to achieve rough sets based attribute reduction .
In addition , the discrete chaos firefly algorithm achieved attribute reduction with average and minimal number of attribute reductions less than binary particle swarm optimization for the SPECTF dataset as well as for the heart disease dataset .
In addition , running time of the discrete chaos firefly algorithm is faster than binary particle swarm optimization for finding an optimal reduction .
Furthermore , only 3 generations can be used with the chaos firefly algorithm to discover the minimal attribute reduction for both heart disease and SPECTF datasets .
While , binary particle swarm optimization can find out the minimal attribute reduction in 6 generations for heart disease datasets and 37 generations for SPECTF datasets ( see Fig 4a and 4b ) .
It means that convergences of firefly algorithm approach are 50 % and approximately 92 % faster than binary particle swarm optimization for heart disease and SPECTF datasets , respectively .
Fitness values of each generation of chaos firefly , binary particle swam… Fig 4 .
Fitness values of each generation of chaos firefly , binary particle swam optimization and rough sets based attribute reductions .
Looking at Table 2 and Figs .
5 and 6 it can be seen that the proposed rough sets based attribute reduction using the discrete chaos firefly algorithm is better than using the binary particle swarm optimization in terms of accuracy of classification for both heart disease and SPECTF datasets .
Furthermore , the proposed rough sets based attribute reductions using the discrete chaos firefly algorithm combined with classifier techniques can improve the accuracy for both of the datasets .
In fact , for the heart disease dataset , accuracy from all classifier techniques was improved .
The accuracy of Naive Bayes was improved by approximately 2 % from 83.3 % to 85.2 % .
The accuracy of SVM rose from 75.9 % to 81.5 % .
The accuracy of ANN and new approach increased from 78.8 % to 81.5 % and 86 % to 88.3 % , respectively .
For the SPECTF dataset , the accuracy of ANN and new approach improved from 73.3 % to 77 % and 79.1 % to 87.3 % respectively .
However , Naive Bayes and SVM were not correctly estimated by the classifiers , this is because the specificity of both algorithms was equal to 0 .
Furthermore , comparison with Naive Bayers , support vector machines and artificial neuron network , new approach increases accuracy of classifier by 5 % and 7.5 % of accuracy for heart disease and SPECTF datasets respectively .
Finally , Comparison with previous research ( Shilaskar & Ghatol , 2013 ) , the proposed model increases 9.2 % of accuracy from 78 % to 87.2 % for SPECTF dataset .
Accuracy results of combination classifier with and without feature selections… Fig 5 .
Accuracy results of combination classifier with and without feature selections for heart disease dataset .
Accuracy results of combination classifier with and without feature selections… Fig 6 .
Accuracy results of combination classifier with and without feature selections for SPECTF dataset .
From Table 2 and Figs .
5 and 6 , it was found that the new approach outperforms other classifier techniques in terms of accuracy from both datasets .
In addition , when combining the rough sets based attribute reduction techniques , performances of the new approach classifier model were improved .
Furthermore , the combination of the new approach classifier model with rough sets based attribute reduction has greater efficiency and higher accuracy than other models with both Heart disease and SPECTF datasets .
Overall , the proposed techniques have several strengths over other techniques .
Firstly , the proposed models can efficiently find minimal reductions .
In fact , proposed attribute reduction technique can discovery only 4 out of 44 attributes for SPECTF dataset and 4 out of 12 attributes for heart disease dataset .
Those attribute reductions are significant less than previous researches such as 12 out of 44 attributes ( Guan et al. , 2009 ) , 19 out of 44 attributes ( Shilaskar and Ghatol ( 2013 ) , and 15 out of 44 attributes ( Inbarani et al. , 2014 ) for SPECTF dataset .
Beside that the proposed attribute reduction technique is significant faster convergence speed and quicker running time than rough sets and particle swarm optimization based attribute reduction .
In addition , the use of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system to handle the uncertainties , noisiness of datasets with results of higher prediction performance comparison with other techniques .
However , the training time of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system by chaos firefly and genetic hybrid algorithms is quitter slow .
It is worth noting that the advantage of proposed model comes with the interpretation abilities offered by combining rough sets with interval type-2 fuzzy logic system .
The rough sets and chaos firefly algorithm assists to find minimal reductions which therefore reduces computational burden and enhances performance of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system .
The use of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system for classification of heart disease datasets to handle the uncertainties and noisiness of these datasets was successful .
This paper proposes a combination of rough sets based attribute reduction with interval type-2 fuzzy logic system for heart disease diagnosis .
The rough sets based attribute reduction using chaos firefly algorithm is proposed .
It can efficiently find minimal attribute reduction from high-dimensional dataset that enhances the performance of the classification system .
The use of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system for classification of heart disease datasets to handle the uncertainties and noisiness of these datasets was successful .
The comparisons of the interval type-2 fuzzy logic system to Naive Bayers , support vector machines , and artificial neural network were also presented .
Through simulation results on two benchmark datasets , the proposed combination rough sets based attribute reduction with interval type-2 fuzzy logic system overcomes others in terms of accuracy , convergence speed and processing time .
In addition , all classifier techniques uses in this study show an enhancement when combined with rough sets based attribute reduction .
In particular , rough sets based attribute reduction using chaos firefly algorithm are found effective when applied to the interval type-2 fuzzy logic system with results of fewer features but higher classification accuracy .
The proposed approach however has several limitations that need to be resolved .
First of all , the proposed rough sets based attribute reduction is unmanageable when the number of attributes is huge or when the number of records is large .
Finally , the training time of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system by chaos firefly and genetic hybrid algorithms is quite slow .
In the future study , the authors will continue to investigate and design efficient heuristic approaches for attribute reduction techniques to manage huge amounts of features and large numbers of records .
In addition , the chaos firefly algorithm can be improved using Levy flights in moving strategy of firefly in further study .
As a result , improving performance of attribute reduction methods as well as improving learning parameters of fuzzy logic system can be done .
Finally , parallel algorithm will be investigated further in future studies to achieve a significant speedup .