This paper presents the research work involved in the development of a knowledge based system ( KBS ) for automated design of deep drawing die for axisymmetric parts .
The production rule based KBS approach of artificial intelligence ( AI ) is utilized for development of the proposed system .
The overall system is organized in 27 modules .
System modules are coded in AutoLISP language and user interface is created using Visual Basic 6.0 and AutoCAD software .
The proposed system is capable to automate all major activities of design of deep drawing die such as manufacturability assessment of deep drawn parts , design of strip-layout , process planning , selection of die components , and modeling of die components and die assembly .
The system is user interactive , flexible and has low cost of implementation .
Deep drawing is one of the typical sheet metal forming process used to produce axisymmetric and irregular hollow shapes through combined action of tensile and compressive deformation .
Design of deep drawing die is a highly specialized task .
It includes number of important activities that sequential start with determination of blank size , manufacturability assessment of deep drawn parts , selection of process parameters , determination of process sequence , selection/design of die components , and modeling of die components and die assembly .
Traditionally , these tasks are carried out by skilled die designers and process planners using experience-based trial-and-error procedure ( Sitaraman , Kinzel , & Altan , 1991 ; Tisza & Racz , 1991 ) .
Traditional design process of a deep drawing die is manual , tedious , time consuming and error-prone , which results in high cost and long manufacturing lead time of deep drawn parts ( Sing & Rao , 1997 ) .
Therefore automated design of deep drawing die has become a challenge for researchers .
From early 1970s to mid 1980s , the first generation CAD/CAM systems for die design were developed to reduce time , cost and to minimize the trail-and-error adjustments in die design process .
Schaffer ( 1971 ) was probably the pioneers in use of computer in die design .
The system labeled as PDDC ( Progressive Die Design by Computer ) was developed to identify projections of the part which may subject the die to undue stresses during cutting operation .
Later on , Fogg and Jaimeson ( 1975 ) proposed an improved PDDC system by considering other factors which influence the die design .
Nakahara et al .
( 1978 ) proposed a CAD/CAM system for automation of progressive die design .
A progressive die design system was also developed by Shirai and Murakami ( 1985 ) .
System is capable to automate strip-layout planning , die layouts , and other activities of design of progressive dies .
Altan ( 1987 ) described some of the interactive CAD/CAM systems for die design and manufacturing .
These CAD/CAM systems are developed for forging , extrusion , rolling , forming of shells and sheet metal forming .
Bergstrom , Kivivuori , Osenius , and Korhonen ( 1988 ) reported to develop a CAD/CAM system for automation of progressive die .
This system includes functions like calculation of springback , die clearance , bending radius , forces and flat pattern generation .
Prasad and Somasundaram ( 1992 ) developed a computer aided die design system labeled as CADDS .
This system consists of modules for calculation of bend allowance , nesting , strip layout design and die design .
Nee ( 1994 ) presented a CAD system for automation of progressive die design .
Choudhary and Allada ( 1999 ) developed an integrated PC-based CAD/CAM system for design of precision punches and dies for small scale manufacturers .
The system deals with only blanking and piercing operations .
With the advancement in the area of computer graphics , CAD/CAM and AI , worldwide researchers started to apply various AI techniques along with suitable CAD systems for die design .
Karima and Richardson ( 1987 ) pioneered the idea of knowledge based system ( KBS ) in sheet metal forming .
Karima ( 1989 ) presented a hybrid system for process planning in sheet metal forming .
Eshel , Barash , and Chang ( 1986 ) developed a rule based expert system for generation of process plan for axisymmetric and monotone parts produced by deep drawing process .
They suggested G & TR ( Generate & Test and Rectify ) strategy for the process planning of axisymmetric deep drawing products .
Tisza ( 1995 ) developed an expert system for sheet metal forming applications .
AutoCAD software and AutoLISP language are used to develop this system .
Esche , Khamitkar , Kinzel , and Altan ( 1996 ) developed an expert system to generate process sequences for multi-stage drawing of round cups and tool geometry for each station of the sequence .
Sing and Rao ( 1997 ) constructed a knowledge based CAPP system using decision tables for axi-symmetrical deep drawn cup .
Park , Choi , Kim , and Choi ( 1998 ) developed a rule based computer aided process planning design system for generation of process sequence with intermediate object geometry and also to determine process parameters .
Choi , Choi , Naa , Baeb , and Chung ( 2002 ) used case based reasoning ( CBR ) approach to develop a modular design support system for production of circular cup .
Kang and Park ( 2002 ) constructed a rule based expert system for process planning of multi-stage non-axisymmetric deep drawn parts having elliptical cross-sectional shape .
Park and Prasad ( 2004 ) and Park and Prasad ( 2005 ) developed surface area calculating system and CAPP system for non-axisymmetric deep drawn parts with elliptical shape .
Wifi , Gomaa , and Abdel-Magied ( 2004 ) , Wifi , Gomaa , and Abdel-Magied ( 2005 ) reported to develop a CAPP system using rule-base technique for complex axisymmetric circular and rectangular deep drawn parts .
This system is coded using Visual Basic ( VB ) and interfaced with AutoCAD software .
Zhang , Tor , and Britton ( 2006 ) developed a CAPP system for multi-stage non-axisymmetric sheet metal deep drawing parts using CBR approach .
Abbassi and Zghal ( 2007 ) proposed a CAPP system based on the experimental results and empirical knowledge of experts for axisymmetric deep drawn parts .
Researchers ( Lin , Chan , & Wang 2008 ; Lin , Chang , Huang , & Liu 2008 ; Lin & Hsu 2008 ) from Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering , National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology , China developed a knowledge-based parametric design system to automate the design of main components of a drawing die .
Researchers at Indian Institute of Technology , Guwahati , India ( Babu , Narayanan , & Kumar 2010 ) developed an artificial neural network ( ANN ) based expert system for predicting forming behavior of tailor welded blank ( TWB ) for varied weld and blank conditions .
Lin and Kuo ( 2011 ) proposed a method to explore multi-objective optimization in the structural design of ribs for drawing dies by combining finite element analysis and the fuzzy-based taguchi method .
Hernandez , Kremer , Schmidt , and Herrera ( 2012 ) developed a sustainability tool and method adviser to assist engineers in the selection of design for environment methods and tools .
Treviño , Salazar , Ortíz , and Alejo ( 2013 ) proposed an expert system to assist machining processes users in order to generate a set of machining parameters that improves the process considering the minimization of surface roughness .
Some other researchers ( Cheok , Foong , Nee , & Teng , 1994 ; Chu , Tor , & Britton , 2004 ; George-Christophe , Segredou , & Giannakakis , 2005 ; Ghatrehnaby & Arezoo , 2009 ; Giannakakis & George-Christopher , 2008 ; Hussein 2006 ; Hwang , Han , Bae , & Kim , 2009 ; Ismail , Chen , & Hon , 1996 ; Ismail , Hon , & Huang , 1995 ; Kim , Park , Kim , & Choi , 2002 ; Kumar & Singh , 2007a ; Kumar & Singh , 2007b ; Kumar & Singh , 2007c ; Kumar & Singh , 2008 ; Kumar & Singh , 2011 ; Kumar , Singh , & Sekhon , 2006 ; Lin , Hsu , & Yao , 1989 ; Nee & Foong , 1992 ; Potocnik , Ulbin , & Dolsak , 2012 ; Singh & Sekhon , 1996 ; Singh & Sekhon , 1998 ; Tor , Britton , & Zhang , 2005 ; Tsai , You , Lin , & Liu , 2010 ) developed KBSs for design of single operation dies ( shearing , blanking , bending etc . )
and progressive dies .
Today , some commercial software packages ( UG , CATIA , SolidWorks etc . )
having special die design modules are available in the market .
Also there are some dedicated CAD applications available in the market developed on platform of commercial software , like 3D-QuickStrip , Logopress3 developed on SolidWorks platform , and VAMOS CAA V5 progressive die on CATIA platform .
Experienced die designers are using these softwares for various activities of die design process such as flat pattern development , nesting of parts , blank layout and generation of drawing of strip layout , mainly for shearing and bending operations .
However , most of these softwares provide a vertical solution for die design and their applicability is also restricted to limited part geometries .
Hence , users are not satisfied with these existing solutions .
Further , die designers have to use multiple software packages for various activities of die design process and connectivity between these softwares is mostly non-existent .
Well trained , competent and experienced persons are required to operate these softwares and interpret the results .
Also , small scale industries are not able to afford these systems because of their high costs .
Therefore , there is stern need to develop an intelligent system for design of deep drawing dies by combining suitable AI technique and CAD system .
The system should have rich knowledge-base comprising knowledge of experienced die designers and process planners , must be user friendly , has low cost of implementation and capable to perform all major tasks related to die design .
This paper presents a KBS for automated design of deep drawing die for axisymmetric parts .
The proposed system is capable to automate all major activities of design of deep drawing die ; and flexible and has low cost of implementation .
Manufacturability assessments Manufacturability assessment of deep drawn parts is the first important activity of design of deep drawing die .
It should be in concurrent with product development , since it helps to identify and resolve potential problems on the part such as splitting and excessive thinning or wrinkling at initial die design process .
Higher thickness to diameter ratio is good and it should be at least 1.0 percent .
If it is less , then wrinkling may occur .
Depth and length of the deep drawn parts must be greater than one half of their diameter .
Plastic deformation during deep drawing process must be kept below the strain at the ultimate strength of the material .
Sharp radius ( inside radius or flange radius ) should be avoided .
Draw and punch radii should be at least four times of sheet thickness .
With a large radius of the drawing die ranging from 8 to 15 times of sheet thickness , smaller values of the severity of the draw coefficient may be used .
Subsequently , with smaller drawing die radii such as those ranging from 4 to 8 times of sheet thickness , larger draw coefficient is recommended .
When the draw radius is too small , excessive thinning or fracture results at the bottom of a shell and at any stage of the operation .
This can be corrected by increasing die radius or blank diameter to allow easier metal flow .
Process planning During the process planning , the die designer or process planner has to determine various process parameters such as limiting draw ratio , die radius , punch radius , clearance , punch velocity , type of lubricant etc .
These process parameters depend on sheet material , sheet thickness , type of die , accuracy requirement and complexity of part geometry etc .
Generally the limiting draw ratio ( blank diameter to cup diameter ) is taken as 1.8 for aluminum ; 1.9 for steel and 2.0 for stainless steel sheet material .
Die radius should be four to six times of material thickness for steel and five to ten times for stainless steel and aluminum .
Punch radius should be at least four to eight times of material thickness for steel , and eight to ten times for aluminum sheet material .
Generally it is recommended that punch-die clearance should be at least 1.10 times of sheet thickness .
Experienced process planners recommend that punch velocity should be 0.4 m/s for deep drawing of steel and 0.15–0.2 m/s for stainless steel and aluminum alloys .
Lubricants must be checked for compatibility with sheet material .
Strip-layout design For design of strip-layout , die designers identify the sheet metal operations required and their proper sequence for production of defect free deep drawn parts .
Local features of different types should be produced at separate stations .
If there is a hole inside the deep drawing shape , then it should be worked after the deep drawing operation .
When two stages are used to lance the strip , there should be minimum 3.0 mm distance between two lance operations .
Sequence of operations should be in such a way that all features and tolerances can be controlled .
Once the sequence of operations is established , idle stations can be inserted if necessary .
Idle stations should be included to strengthen a die and to incorporate future design modifications .
The strip width and feed distance depend on the sheet thickness , dimensions of blank and direction of sharp edge of sheet , and number of stations .
Selection of die components Selection of die components is a vital step of the design process of a deep drawing die .
A deep drawing die consists of several components including die block , punch ( es ) , die gages , strippers , stripper plate , punch plate , back plate , die-set and fasteners .
The size of die block depends on sheet thickness , sheet material , direction of sharp edge of strip , strip size , and die material .
Dimensions of die gages mainly depend on size of stock strip .
It is necessary to maintain a minimum gap of about 5–10 times of sheet thickness between fixed stripper plates and die plate .
The size of stripper plate corresponds to the size of die block .
Stationary strippers are provided with a milled channel in its bottom surface to accommodate and guide the strip material .
The width of channel in the stripper should be equal to the strip width plus adequate clearance to allow for variations in strip width .
The height of the channel should be at least equal to 1.5 times of sheet thickness .
The thickness of punch plate depends on punch diameter .
Length and width of punch plate are usually same as that of die block .
Back-up plates are hardened and normally interposed between small perforator punches and punch holder .
The backup plate is generally about 10–12 mm thick .
A die-set is a unit component constituted of punch holder , die holder , guide post , and guide bush .
Die designer needs to determine the type and size of die-set ( Waller , 1978 ) .
Selection of type of die-set depends on the type of sheet metal operation , part quantity and job accuracy .
Dimensions of die-set depend upon the length and width of the die and its placement in the die-set .
Die-shoe forms the base of the die-set and in majority of die-sets the guideposts are mounted on it .
The die shoe thickness is based on how much force can be expected during cutting and forming operation .
The length of guideposts should be sufficient so that it never come out of their bushings during the press operation ( Smith , 1990 ) .
The guide pins should be 6.5 mm shorter than the shut height of the die .
The primary purpose of fasteners is to clamp together all die components in a safe and secure manner .
Whenever possible hex-socket head cap type screws should be used .
For die sets of greater weight , an additional socket cap screw should be inserted through the upper die shoe to the underside of the ram .
Screw head holes must be counter-bored in the die section and screw threads must enter into die components at least 1.5 times of its diameter .
To achieve the precise alignment at least two dowels per block are essential and must be press-fitted .
The number and size of screws are determined by estimating the space available and the load to be resisted .
Generally four Allen bolts are used at the four corners of die block .
Modeling of die components and die assembly Modeling of plate elements requires the dimensional data of die block , die gages , stripper plate , punch plate and back plate .
For automatic 2-dimensional ( 2D ) modeling of plate elements of deep drawing die , drawing commands of AutoCAD such as LINE , PLINE , CIRCLE , FILLET , LAYER , etc .
can be invoked .
Similarly , for 3-dimensional ( 3D ) modeling of die components and die assembly in the drawing editor of AutoCAD software , AutoCAD commands such as ORBIT , EXTRUDE , UNION , SUBTRACT , REVOLVES , SWEEPS etc .
can be invoked .
Based on the above considerations , an automated design system labeled as INTDDD ( Intelligent Design of Deep Drawing Die ) is developed for design of deep drawing die .
Development procedure of the proposed system Development of the proposed system INTDDD includes various steps such as knowledge acquisition , framing of production rules , verification of production rules , sequencing of rules , identification of computer language and hardware , construction of knowledge base , choice of search strategy and preparation of user interference ( Kumar & Singh , 2004 ) .
Technical knowledge for the development for each module of the proposed system is essentially collected by online and off line consultation with experienced die designers , process planners , and shop floor engineers of different stamping industries .
Knowledge is also acquired from published research articles , industry catalogs and manuals of various stamping industries .
Production rule based knowledge representation scheme is used to represent the acquired knowledge .
The production rules framed for each module are crosschecked from a team of experienced die designers by presenting them IF-condition of the production rule of IF-THEN variety .
The framed rules are arranged in a structured manner .
The proposed system is implemented on window based operating environment on a PC with hardware configuration as core2 Duo processor with 4 GB RAM and interfaced with AutoCAD software .
AutoLISP language is used for coding of production rules incorporated in various modules of the proposed system .
Rules and knowledge base are linked together by an inference mechanism .
Graphical user interface is constructed using Visual Basic 6.0 , interfaced with AutoCAD software on windows operating system .
Expert advice ( s ) is likewise flashed into the graphical user interface , whenever relevant production rules are fired .
The system INTDDD overall comprises of more than 1000 production rules of IF-THEN variety .
A sample of production rules incorporated in various modules of the system INTDDD is given in Table 1 .
Table 1 .
A Sample of production rules included in the system INTDDD .
S. No .
IF ( condition ) Then ( action ) 1 Ratio of flange diameter to cup diameter < 1.1 ; and 0.0006 ⩽ ratio of sheet thickness to blank diameter < 0.002 Set the ratio of cup height to cup diameter ⩽ 0.50 2 Sheet material = extra deep drawing steel ; and 0.0008 ⩽ ratio of sheet thickness to blank diameter < 0.0015 ; and draw stage = fourth Set limiting draw rate ⩽ 0.86 3 Sheet material = M.S .
EDD ; and ratio of flange diameter to cup diameter ⩽ 1.1 0.0006 ⩽ Set the thickness ratio > 0.02 4 Material = mild steel ; and draw = first Set clearance = 1.40 times of sheet material thickness 5 Material = mild steel ; and type of press = single action Set the drawing speed = 0.30 m/s 6 Sheet material = M.S .
EDD ; and sheet material thickness ( mm ) ⩽ 1.0 Set the blank holder pressure = 0.20 to 0.25 N/mm2 7 100 < Punch diameter [ mm ] < 200 7.0 < Air vent hole diameter [ mm ] < 8.0 8 Sheet material is mild steel ; and sheet thickness < 0.5 mm Lubricant = Mineral oil ; SP – Emulsion ; grease 9 4 times of sheet of thickness ⩽ die radius > 10 times of sheet thickness Accept die radius 10 −0.1 < Tolerance on part ( mm ) < +0.1 ; and cut an interior section without removing the section from sheet Required operation = lancing 11 −0.1 < tolerance on part ( mm ) < +0.1 ; and produce deep recess on part Required operation = deep drawing 12 Required operations on part – deep drawing , lancing , piercing , blanking , & parting Preferred sequence of operation : 1st – Lancing , 2nd – Deep drawing , 3rd – Piercing , 4th – Blanking , and 5th – Parting 13 No hole exists on the part , and no notching operation ( on opposite sides ) to be done on the part Locate pilots on the scrap sections formed by the notching operation 14 Required operations on part = notching ( one ) , deep drawing ( 4 stages ) , parting , blanking , trimming No .
of stations = 10 There is possibility of future engineering changes in the par Preferred staging : First station = pilot piercing Second station = notching Third station = first draw Fourth station = second draw Fifth station = idle Sixth station = third draw Seventh station = fourth draw Eighth station = trimming Ninth station = blanking Tenth station = parting off 15 Sheet thickness < 3.0 mm ; and blank diameter ⩽ 10.0 mm Select sheet length [ mm ] = ( blank diameter + 2.8 ) × number of stations 16 Sheet thickness ⩽ 0.80 mm ; and 25 < blank diameter [ mm ] ⩽ 75.0 Select sheet width [ mm ] = blank diameter + 3.0 17 30 ⩽ Blank diameter [ mm ] < 60 ; and 3.0 ⩽ sheet thickness [ mm ] < 6.0 Feeding space = 2.5 mm , carrier width = 3.5 mm , and bridge width = 4.0 mm 18 4.0 < Sheet thickness [ mm ] ⩽ 6.0 ; and die material = tool steel Select die block thickness = 32 mm 19 Cup diameter < 22 mm ; and 1.0 < sheet thickness ( mm ) ⩽ 2.0 ; and die material = tool steel Select width of die block = ( sheet width + 24 mm ) 20 50 ⩽ Cup diameter [ mm ] < 80 ; and 1.5 < sheet thickness [ mm ] ⩽ 2.0 ; and die material = tool steel Select length of die block [ mm ] = ( strip length in mm + 40 ) 21 2.0 ⩽ Sheet thickness [ mm ] < 3.0 ; and type of feed = automatic Select the minimum thickness of die gage = 8.0 mm ; and distance between die gages ( mm ) = ( strip width + 1.5 ) 22 60 < Cup diameter [ mm ] ⩽ 70 ; and 1.5 < sheet thickness [ mm ] ⩽ 3.0 Set negative tolerance on punch = 0.04 mm , Select circular punch of length = ( cup height + 42 mm ) , Punch plate thickness = 18 mm , and Back plate thickness = 6.0 mm 23 Operation = Deep drawing ; and Batch production quantity ⩾ 10,000 ; and 0.025 ⩽ precision on part ( mm ) ⩽ 0.1 ; and clearance ( mm ) ⩽ 0.0225 Select die-set with four ball bearing bushings on top bolster and four guide pillars on lower bolster 24 350 < Working area [ mm2 ] ⩽ 700 ( parallel to die-set ) ; and tolerance required on part ( mm ) ⩽ 0.01 Place die in the 4 pillar die-set with pillar diameter = 35 mm , bush diameter = 50 mm , and bolster dimensions [ mm ] : length = 905 ; width = 400 ; and height = 60 3.2 .
Organization of the proposed system As the deep drawing die design process involves various activities , the proposed system INTDDD has been organized into various sub-systems and modules .
Organization of the developed system is shown in Fig 1 .
Various sub-systems and modules are briefly described as under : Organization of the proposed knowledge based system Fig 1 .
Organization of the proposed knowledge based system .
Sub-system MCKBS A sub-system labeled as MCKBS is constructed for manufacturability assessment of deep drawn sheet metal parts .
Execution of the proposed system is shown in Fig 2 .
The proposed system uses graphical user interface ( GUI ) created using Visual Basic 6.0 to enter necessary inputs and to get display of outputs at appropriate stages during a consultation .
Part geometry detail entered by the user to the system is automatically stored in a part data file namely PART.DAT .
The user is guided in a friendly manner throughout the consultation on how to proceed further at each stage .
The system is capable to check various design parameters which are critical in term of manufacturability of deep drawn parts such as limiting thickness ratio , height ratio , draw ratio , draw radius etc .
System assists die designer to identify and resolve potential problems on the part such as splitting and excessive thinning or potential for wrinkling .
Execution of the sub-system MCKBS Fig 2 .
Execution of the sub-system MCKBS .
Sub-system PPDDP The sub-system labeled as PPDDP is developed for process planning of axisymmetric deep drawn parts .
This system consists of three modules–first module namely BLDIA is developed for modeling of part geometry and calculation of blank diameter , the second module PROCPAR is constructed for selection of various process parameters ( drawing force , blank holding force , draw measures , clearance , type of lubricant , draw speed , air vent size etc .
) , and the last module DRWSEQ is developed for determination of process sequence .
The system is capable to model the process sequence at each stage automatically in the drawing editor of AutoCAD software .
Outputs of these three modules are stored respectively in data files BLDIA.DAT , PROCPAR.DAT and DRWSEQ.DAT .
Sub-system ISDSL A sub-system labeled as ISDSL is developed for design of strip-layout for production of axisymmetric deep drawn parts .
The proposed sub-system is organized into seven different modules .
The first module namely IDOPR is developed for identification of operations required to manufacture the deep drawn part .
The second module labeled as SEQOPR identifies proper sequencing of operations .
Next module namely SELPLT selects the proper piloting scheme .
The Module OPSTG is developed for staging of operations required to manufacture deep drawn part on progressive deep drawing die .
The fifth module labeled as SLWS assists die designer for selection of strip size .
Remaining two modules namely BLOUT and MSLYT are developed respectively for modeling of blank layout and strip-layout automatically in the drawing editor of AutoCAD software .
Execution of the sub-system ISDSL is depicted in Fig 3 .
The system takes its inputs automatically from various output data files generated during execution of previous modules .
Outputs generated by various modules of the proposed sub-system are also stored automatically in various data files and drawing files .
Execution of the sub-system ISDSL Fig 3 .
Execution of the sub-system ISDSL .
Sub-system DDCOMP A sub-system namely DDCOMP is developed for selection of major components of deep drawing die .
The system is structured in form of eight modules , namely module DBLCK for selection of size of die block , module DGAGE for selection of die gages , module STRP for selection of stripper and stripper plate , module PUNSEL for selection of punch details , module PBPLT for selection of punch plate and backup plate , module BHOLD for selection of size of blankholder , module DSS for selection of type and size of die-set , and module FSTN for selection of fasteners .
The structure and execution of proposed system is shown in Fig 4 .
The sizes of die components as recommended by various modules of this sub-system are automatically stored in various output data files , which can be further recalled for automatic modelling of die components and die assembly of deep drawing die .
Execution of sub-system DDCOMP Fig 4 .
Execution of sub-system DDCOMP .
Sub-system AUTODDMOD The sub-system AUTODDMOD is developed for automatic modeling ( 2D and 3D ) of deep drawing die components and die assembly in the drawing editor of AutoCAD software .
Execution of the sub-system is depicted in Fig 5 .
The proposed system consists of nine modules namely , DBLCKMOD , STRPMOD , BPLTMOD , PPLTMOD , BLNKHMOD , BBDSMOD , TBDSMOD , DBAMOD and DTAMOD .
The output data files of various modules of earlier developed modules of various sub-systems are recalled automatically during execution of the proposed sub-system AUTODDMOD .
The first module namely DBLCKMOD is developed for automatic modeling of die block of deep drawing die .
The next module labeled as STRPMOD is constructed for automatic modeling of stripper plate .
The module BPLTMOD is developed for modeling of back plate of deep drawing die .
The next module labeled as PPLTMOD is capable to model punch plate automatically in the drawing editor of AutoCAD software .
The module namely BHOLDMOD of the proposed sub-system is developed to model blankholder of deep drawing die .
The modules labeled as BBDMOD and TBDMOD are developed respectively for automatic modeling of bottom bolster and top bolster of die-set of deep drawing die .
The next module labeled as DBAMOD is developed for automatic modeling of bottom assembly of deep drawing die .
The last module namely DTAMOD of the proposed sub-system is developed for automatic modeling of top assembly of deep drawing die .
Execution of the sub-system AUTODDMOD Fig 5 .
Execution of the sub-system AUTODDMOD .
The proposed system INTDDD has been tested on various types of industrial deep drawn sheet metal parts for design of deep drawing die .
A sample of typical prompts , user responses and expert advices obtained during the execution of system modules through graphical user interface ( GUI ) for one example component ( Fig 6 ) is depicted respectively in Table 2 .
The user is required to enter part details to the system through user interface as shown in Fig 7 .
The draw sequence generated by the module DRWSEQ and strip-layout generated by the module MSLYT for example component are shown respectively in Figs .
8 and 9 .
The drawings ( 2D and 3D ) of bottom and top die assembly generated by the modules of sub-system AUTODDMOD are shown in Figs .
10–13 .
The outputs of various modules of proposed system INTDDD are found to be reasonable and very similar to those actually practiced by domain experts in industry ( namely M/s GEC Private Limited , Pune , India ) for the example component .
The proposed system has also been successfully tested in other industries like M/s Shrys Tool Makers , Pune , M/s Hindustan pressings Pvt .
Ltd. , Pune , M/s Allwin press tools , Pune , M/s G & G Engineering , Pune , and M/s Nirmiti Stampings Pvt .
Ltd. Pune , India for various types of axisymmetric deep drawn sheet metal parts .
Example component ( All dimensions are in mm ; Sheet material : Mild steel , Sheet… Fig 6 .
Example component ( All dimensions are in mm ; Sheet material : Mild steel , Sheet thickness : 1.0 mm ) .
Table 2 .
A sample of typical prompts , user responses and expert advices generated during execution of the system INTDDD for example component .
S. no .
Typical prompts ( display through GUI ) Input entry through GUI Expert advices imparted by the system 1 Please enter part material M.S .
E.D.D 2 Please enter sheet thickness [ mm ] 1.0 Accept thickness ratio 3 Please enter part features and it dimensions [ mm ] Ring ; convex ; cylinder ; convex ; disc Recommended blank diameter with trimming allowance [ mm ] = 62.74 4 Enter flange diameter [ mm ] 40 5 Enter shell height [ mm ] 22 Accept height ratio 6 Enter die radius [ mm ] 4 Accept die radius 7 Enter punch radius [ mm ] 4 Accept punch radius 8 Enter draw number First Set the clearance = 1.4 times of sheet thickness 9 Enter type press Single action Set the draw speed = 0.3 m/s ; and Set blankholder force between 0.20 and 0.25 ( N/mm2 ) ; and set draw force in Tons for First stage = 18.50 ; Second stage = 10.16 ; Third stage = 6.39 ; Fourth stage = 5.3 Please load module DRWSEQ 10 Is any hole ( s ) present on part ?
No Select indirect piloting ; and number of stations required = 10 Preferred staging is given as under : 1st – Pilot piercing ; 2nd – Piloting ; First lancing ; 3rd – Second lancing ; 4th – First draw ; 5th – Idle ; 6th – Second draw ; 7th – Third draw ; 8th – Fourth draw ; 9th – Blanking ; 10th – Parting off 11 Please select type of feed : Manual/automatic automatic Set the strip length = 727 mm and strip width = 81 mm Please load sub-system DDCOMP 12 DDCOMP Die block thickness = 36.00 mm Die block width = 175.0 mm Die block Length = 755.0 mm Select die-set with four ball bearing bushings on top bolster and four guide pillars on lower bolster .
Place die in the 4 pillar die set with pillar diameter 40 mm and bolster dimensions as Length = 905.0 mm Width = 400.0 mm Height = 60.0 mm Please load the sub-system AUTODDMOD for modeling of die components and die assembly User interface of the proposed system INTDDD Fig 7 .
User interface of the proposed system INTDDD .
Output of DRWSEQ module for example component Fig 8 .
Output of DRWSEQ module for example component .
Output of MSLYT module for example component Fig 9 .
Output of MSLYT module for example component .
Output of DBAMOD module ( 2D drawing of bottom die assembly for example… Fig 10 .
Output of DBAMOD module ( 2D drawing of bottom die assembly for example component ) .
Output of DBAMOD module ( 3D drawing of bottom die assembly for example… Fig 11 .
Output of DBAMOD module ( 3D drawing of bottom die assembly for example component ) .
Output of DTAMOD module ( 2D drawing of bottom die assembly for example… Fig 12 .
Output of DTAMOD module ( 2D drawing of bottom die assembly for example component ) .
Output of DTAMOD module ( 3D drawing of bottom die assembly for example… Fig 13 .
Output of DTAMOD module ( 3D drawing of bottom die assembly for example component ) .
The proposed system is ready to utilize in sheet metal industries for automating the tedious task of design of deep drawing dies for axisymmetric parts .
The system is capable to execute the complete task of design ( including modeling ) of deep drawing die in less than an hour .
Specific features of the proposed system are following : ( i ) It consists of more than 1000 production rules of IF-Then variety and it is flexible enough as its knowledge base can be updated easily through insertion of new production rules or updating the existing rules on the advancement in sheet metal technology in future .
( ii ) It is integrated in nature and uses parametric design approach .
( iii ) Even semi-skilled die designers can perform the design of deep drawing dies easily using the proposed system .
Therefore it eliminates dependency on domain experts .
( iv ) The quality of design of deep drawing dies using the proposed system is independent on skill and experience of domain experts .
Therefore it is consistent and less error-prone .
( v ) The proposed system can be implemented on a PC having AutoCAD software .
Therefore its low cost of implementation makes it affordable even for small scale sheet metal industries .
The present research work proposes a knowledge based system ( KBS ) to automate design of deep drawing die for axisymmetric deep drawn parts .
The system is developed using production rule based approach of AI .
The manual , tedious and time-consuming task of design of deep drawing is automated through development of KBS modules for manufacturability assessment of deep drawn parts , process planning of deep drawn parts , strip-layout design , selection of die components , and modeling ( 2D and 3D ) of deep drawing die .
The developed system has been validated successfully in various industries for a wide variety of axisymmetric deep drawn parts .
The system is capable of accomplishing the design task of deep drawing die in a very short time period and finally generates outputs in form of drawings of strip-layout , die components and die assembly .
The system has low cost of implementation as it can be implemented on a PC having AutoCAD software and therefore , it is affordable even for small scale stamping industries .
The present system is capable to design deep drawing dies for axisymmetric deep drawn parts only .
Future research efforts are required to extend this system to deal with non-axisymmetric parts also .
A computer integrated manufacturing ( CIM ) system also needs to be developed which will utilize the outputs of proposed KBS for die manufacturing .
An automated system can also be developed for prediction of die stresses and die life using Finite Element Analysis ( FEA ) and Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) technique .
The similar KBS approach can also be used for automation of design of other types of dies such as bending die , compound die , transfer die etc .