Value co-creation is an emerging business , marketing and innovation paradigm describing the firms aptitude to adopt practices enabling their customers to become active participants in the design and development of personalised products , services and experiences .
The main objective of our contribution is to make a quantitative analysis in order to assess the relationship between value co-creation and innovation in technology-driven firms : we are using Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) to investigate the relationship between value co-creation and innovativeness , and Self Organising Map ( SOM ) models to cluster firms in terms of their degree of involvement in co-creation and innovativeness .
Results from the ANN show that a strong relationship exists between value co-creation and innovativeness ; furthermore , SOM are well performing in identifying cluster of firms that are more involved in co-creation values .
Our work makes a methodological contribution by adopting and validating a combination of techniques that is able to address complexity and emergence in value co-creation systems .
The ongoing globalisation processes and the emergence of markets with heterogeneous customer needs are forcing companies to look for new sources of innovation and competitive differentiation , e.g. , by shifting their classical frame of mind to end users through the adoption of a new marketing approach in which end users become an active part in designing and shaping personalised products , services and experiences .
This trend has established value co-creation ( Chesbrough , 2011 ; Mindgley , 2009b ; Ramaswamy & Gouillart , 2010b ; Tanev , Knudsen , & Gerstlberger , 2009 ) as an important marketing and innovation paradigm ( Lusch & Vargo , 2006 ; Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) , describing how customers and end users could be involved as active participants in the process of value creation ( Etgar , 2008 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ; Payne , Storbacka , & Frow , 2008 ) .
The concept of co-creation is based on the design and development of customer participation platforms , which allow firms to use technological and human resources to benefit from the engagement of individuals and communities ( Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; Nambisan & Nambisan , 2008 ; Sawhney , Gianmario , & Prandelli , 2005 ) .
These platforms enable the personalisation of new products and services challenging traditional marketing segmentation techniques , by promoting a new service-dominant logic ( Vargo & Lusch , 2004 ; von Hippel , 2006a ) which allows firms to tackle heterogeneous markets and to better fit the customer ’ s needs .
The innovation-related implications of value co-creation are emerging amongst the most relevant topics in value co-creation research ( Bowonder , Dambal , Kumar , & Shirodkar , 2010 ; Kristenson , Matthing , & Johansson , 2008 ; Michel , Brown , & Gallan , 2008 ; Midgley , 2009a ; Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2003 ; Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ; Roberts , Bake , & Walker , 2005 ; Romero & Molina , 2009 ; Sawhney et al. , 2005 ; Tanev et al. , 2009 ) since the new paradigm entails a new vision about the relationship between marketing and innovation .
Nevertheless , most of the works have been focused on qualitative case studies , emphasising the role of the customer participation in co-creation on the innovation outcomes , such as innovation cost , time-to-market , new product or service quality and development capacity ( Bowonder et al. , 2010 ; Kristenson et al. , 2008 ; Midgley , 2009a ; Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; Nambisan , 2009 ; Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ; Ramaswamy & Gouillart , 2010a ; Romero & Molina , 2009 ) .
It has to be remarked that the performance of co-creation practices is measured from an innovation perspective alone , neglecting side effects such as brand perception , customer satisfaction , or customer-firm relationship quality ( Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; Nambisan , 2009 ) .
In a nutshell , existing literature fails in analysing the emerging nature of value co-creation systems , neglecting complexity and emergence would affect business model design , pricing models and management practices ( Desai , 2010 ; Ng , 2010 ; Tanev et al. , 2009 ) .
There are no sound quantitative studies focusing on the co-creative sources of innovation .
A first investigation of this specific aspect was performed by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) , focusing on online Internet data and linear regression analysis to examine the relationship between the degree of involvement of firms in value co-creation activities and the frequency of their online comments about their new products , processes and services .
However , the approach suggested therein has an obvious limitation : it relies on a linear relationship between co-creation and innovation , which can not be assumed without loss of generalisation .
It is worthwhile exploring more general models that could potentially take into account the complexity and emergence in value co-creation systems .
The purpose of our work is to perform a quantitative analysis by enhancing the approach by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) w.r.t .
the aforecited limitation .
We will use Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) models to examine the relationship between the degree of firms ’ value co-creation activities and the frequency of online comments about new products , processes and services .
The relevance of adopting the ANN approach stays in that they do not make any assumption about the relationship under study .
By performing this analysis we are aimed to test the hypothesis that : firms with a higher degree of involvement in co-creation activities have a better opportunity to articulate the innovative features of their new products , processes and services .
Furthermore , we will classify firms w.r.t .
the degree of their co-creation activities by means of Self-Organising Map ( SOM ) .
This operation will enable us to identify the firms that are most active in co-creation , and will open up the possibility for future qualitative research focusing on the distinctive features of different co-creation components as part of emerging co-creation strategies .
Testing the above hypothesis will provide insights to understand the context of an increasingly globalised competitive environment , in which firms are facing the limits of traditional marketing techniques that do not necessarily lead to a better competitive positioning or differentiation ( Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) .
The two key contributions of this paper can be therefore summarised as follows : • applying ANNs to model the relationship between value co-creation and innovation ; • using SOM to classify firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in co-creation and innovation .
ANNs and SOMs are considered respectively as supervised ( Reed & Marks , 1999 ) and unsupervised ( Hinton & Sejnowski , 1999 ) Neural Network approaches , able to adapt their topologies and parameters in order to minimise some pre-defined measures of goodness ( usually root mean squared error in ANN approach and Euclidean distance in SOM ) .
Up to the authors knowledge , this is the first application of these approaches to innovation and co-creation .
This paper is organised as follows .
Section 2 provides a conceptual discussion of value co-creation within the context of innovation and complexity theory , Section 3 describes the statistical models applied in this paper , which will be used to explain the correlation between co-creation and innovation .
Section 4 provides results describing the relationship between value co-creation and innovation including a comparison with previous works .
Final remarks are presented in Section 5 .
The adoption of value co-creation practices challenges the traditional ways of innovation management by promoting a new vision of innovation itself ( Kristenson et al. , 2008 ; Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ; Tanev et al. , 2009 ) .
The new co-creative vision of innovation relies on two key distinctive features .
The first one is the customer-driven aspect of the value co-creation activities , in which value co-creation platforms can be seen as a natural extension of some key aspects of user-driven innovation initiatives ( von Hippel , 2006a , 2006b ) by focusing on the development of participation platforms ( Nambisan & Nambisan , 2008 ; Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; von Hippel , 2001 ) and by searching for lead users ( Droge , Stanko , & Pollitte , 2010 ; von Hippel , 2006b ) ; the latter distinctive feature is the focus on a balance between cooperation and competition , or co-opetition .
The co-opetitive dimension of value co-creation platforms leads to define a more dynamic scenario of the economic mechanisms which trigger the innovation processes .
These mechanisms operate on the basis of multiple transactions between customers , partners and suppliers , at multiple access points across the value network .
They enable customers and end users to control the relationship between price and user experience ( Etgar , 2006 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) by providing them the opportunity to create specific value chain configurations leading to new value components , new ways of using existing solutions , or the radical improvement of an existing product or service ( Bowonder et al. , 2010 ; Kristenson et al. , 2008 ) .
In this context customers are referred to as innovators and co-creators .
The participatory platform nature of value co-creation practices enables a broader and more systematic positioning of customers and end users across the entire innovation lifecycle leading to a significant enhancement of the user-driven innovation potential .
As a result , the development of value co-creation platforms is increasingly recognised as a promising innovation strategy ( Bowonder et al. , 2010 ; Nambisan & Baron , 2009 ; Nambisan , 2009 ; Midgley , 2009a ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2003 ; Romero & Molina , 2009 ) .
The co-creation paradigm associates the source of value with the co-creation experience which is actualised through the company-customer interaction events .
By co-creating with the network , the customer becomes an active stakeholder who can define the type of interaction and the specific personal context of the encountering event ( Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2003 ) .
The personal nature of the interaction enables the emergence of new value dimensions which are based on the quality and the personal relevance of the interaction events as well as on the opportunity for customers to co-create unique end products , services and experiences .
These new dimensions are important for the emergence of experience innovation networks putting the individual at the heart of co-creation experience through the dynamic shaping of technological-business process and human resource infrastructures ( Prahalad & Krishnan , 2008 ) .
In this sense , the value co-creation paradigm represents a specific market-driven approach to the adoption of an open innovation business philosophy .
Eventually , the adoption of value co-creation practices could pave the way for the emergence of disruptive innovation business models ( Christensen , 2006 ) .
Some of the sources for such opportunities are : technological breakthroughs as enablers of efficient co-creation mechanism ; changes in the industry logic leading to the emergence of new channels for reaching customers ; changes in customer preferences and lifestyles ( Payne et al. , 2008 ) .
The disruptive innovation potential of value co-creation-driven business models represents a great opportunity for future research .
The adoption of a value co-creation business philosophy requires a re-conceptualisation of the common sequential understanding of the value chain into a complex and dynamic network of value , producing relations between producers , suppliers , customers and end users .
Some scholars still use the usual linear approach to business driven by a Newtonian or mechanistic view of the world , in which each product is associated to a value , is produced away from the market , and is sold by means of decisions made to maximise the profit .
Customers are cut out of any opportunities to become part of the innovation process .
In contrast , one could use a quantum physics view to describe how companies move away from a company-and-product centric approach to participation platform oriented approaches where customers , partners and suppliers cooperate and co-create value ( Tanev et al. , 2009 ) .
This shift implies a new value chain model which is open , non-linear , operationally parallel , and three dimensional .
The features of such a quantum physics model can be summarised as follows : first , there is an uncertainty principle since the specific value chain trajectory is not known in advance ; second , there is a complementarity principle since the output of a particular value chain configuration could be considered in two different and complementary ways as an end product or solution , or as a platform with a focus on the critical role of its network or partnership enabled value component ; third , the power of a value co-creation platform is determined by summing all potential multiple path configurations of value when calculating the probability for a specific market offer ; fourth , the role of the observer ( the customer ) is critical to the specific nature of the final outcome of the interaction ; fifth , there is a place for the manifestation of non-local phenomena such as network knowledge and collective wisdom that provides an additional value dimension making a value co-creation platform more competitive ( Tanev et al. , 2009 ) .
In this model the current pricing mechanisms may not be effective and should involve the development of more dynamic system level pricing , a better understanding of system capacity , with the system as a unit of analysis in prescribing innovatively different pricing schemata ( Ng , 2010 ) .
Systems thinking , complexity theory , network and system sciences will definitely impact the pricing models of value co-creation systems because of the multiple-agent-based interconnected nature of the market offerings .
The nature of the interdependencies is accelerated by technologies moving towards convergence , resulting in the involvement of multiple stakeholders and multiple customers who are all contributing resources into the system while , at the same time , paying for different parts and deriving different benefits from it ( Ng , 2010 ) .
Adaptive leadership and management practices will be crucial for the emergence of competitive value co-creation networks .
Organizations interested in adopting value co-creation strategies need people who could master the principles of adaptive leadership within customers , suppliers and internal networks ( Desai , 2010 ; Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) .
Research methodology The development of business insights by using unstructured public data becomes increasingly popular resource for both scholars and practitioners .
Hicks , Libaers , Porter , and Schoeneck ( 2006 ) and Ferrier ( 2001 ) pioneered the concept that an analysis of the frequency of specific keywords on public websites and corporate news releases can be an adequate representation of the degree of importance placed by firms on the activities represented by those keywords .
More recently Allen , Tanev , and Bailetti ( 2009 ) demonstrated that such methodology could be used to classify value co-creation practices and formalised the key steps of the data gathering and analysis work flow , showing that the frequencies of a specific set of keywords can be used to extract the key components of value co-creation activities , using those ideas to outline a detailed research process .
This process starts with a careful construction of a set of keywords to represent the different value co-creation constitutive dimensions .
Then , the frequency of use of each of the keywords on companies ’ websites and news releases is measured .
This procedure is justified by the fact that most co-creation activities undertaken by technology-driven firms are performed or described online , since the more a firm describes a specific activity , the more it deems this activity relevant for its current situation ( Allen et al. , 2009 ; Ferrier , 2001 ; Hicks et al. , 2006 ) .
Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) is then used to identify emerging groups of keywords that could be associated with specific self-consisting groups of activities ( components ) .
Last , a heuristic technique is outlined to classify firms with regards to their involvement in the different co-creation activities ( Allen et al. , 2009 ) by ranking firms with regards to each of the co-creation components .
This methodology was further enhanced by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) : • examining the perception of firms ’ innovativeness by measuring the frequency of firms ’ online comments about their new products processes and services ; • applying linear regression analysis to test the existence of a positive association between the degree of firms ’ involvement in value co-creation and the perception of their innovativeness ; • using k-means cluster analysis to classify the firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in value co-creation .
In our work , we are using the same research sample , the same co-creation components and the same innovation metric by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) , though we want to enhance its research , applying non linear models and adaptive paradigms , that could be better suited for the new dynamics of the co-creation philosophy , by : • applying ANN approach to model the relationship between co-creation and innovation ; • using the SOM technique to classify the firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in co-creation and innovation .
The composition of the co-creation components derived by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) is based on dataset including 273 firms selected amongst cases found in the reviewed value co-creation literature and amongst firms engaged in OSS projects .
Firms have been selected amongst members of the Eclipse OS Foundation and from two websites : Open Source Experts – www.opensourceexperts.com , and the Canadian Companies Capabilities Directory of OS Companies – http : //strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/ict-tic.nsf/en/h_it07356e.html ) .
A summary of the dataset features can be found in Table 1 .
In Sections 2.2 and 2.3 we are going do describe the matrices used to model co-creation and innovation .
These metrics will be used for the experimental analysis in what follows .
Table 1 .
Firms included in the research sample : the label GEN indicates general type ( non-software ) firms , ECL indicates firm from the Eclipse Foundation , OSS indicates open source software firms not related to the Eclipse Foundation .
Column Freq indicates the cardinality of each type set , and Percent their relative percentage .
Type of firms Frequency Percent GEN 65 23.8 ECL 133 48.7 OSS 75 27.5 Total 273 100.0 2.2 .
Value of co-creation components As stated in Section 2.1 , we need to define co-creation components in order to test if there is a relationship between these components and the innovation metric .
We have chosen to use three components defined in Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) .
Based on these results , The first co-creation component is referred to as Resources and processes and is interpreted as ( resources , processes , tools and mechanisms ) enabling ( customer and user involvement ) in ( production , assembly , manufacturing and self-service ) aiming at ( design and process flexibility ) based on ( product modularity and sharing of internal expertise , resources and IP ) .
The second co-creation component is referred to as Customer relationships and is interpreted as ( customer relationships ) enabled through ( partnerships and cooperation ) aiming at ( cost reduction , design and process flexibility ) , and leading to ( better customer and end user experiences ) based on ( risk management , transparency and trust ) .
The third co-creation component is referred to as Mutual learning and is interpreted as ( mutual learning mechanisms ) based on the existence of user networking forums enabling ( customer suggestions , input , demands and requests ) , and leading to ( multiple options for users ) through involvement in ( test and beta trials ) .
Table 2 shows the main descriptive statistics of the three co-creation variables that were constructed by adding up the ratings of each keyword weighted by its loading ( see Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) for further details about this procedure ) .
Table 2 .
Main statistics of the three principal co-creation variables .
Component Mean STD Skewness Kurtosis Resources and processes 2.290 0.821 0.087 −0.105 Customer relationships 1.857 0.556 0.028 0.251 Mutual learning 5.984 2.457 0.264 −0.126 All 3.973 1.105 −0.078 −0.238 2.3 .
Online innovation metric Table 3 shows the descriptive statistics of the normalised innovation metric assessing the firm ’ s own Perception of innovativeness .
It was used by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) by measuring the frequency of firms ’ online comments about new products , services and processes and it is composed in a way that it would detect any online statement containing the combination of the words new and product , or the words new and service , or new and process etc .
( the complete boolean expression is : new ∧ ( product ∨ service ∨ process ∨ application ∨ solution ∨ feature ∨ release ∨ version ∨ launch ∨ introduction ∨ introduce ∨ “ new product ” ∨ “ new service ” ∨ “ new process ” ) .
Table 3 .
Main statistics of the innovation variable .
Innovation metric Mean STD Skewness Kurtosis Perception 4.745 1.760 −0.126 −0.286 It should be pointed out that the online frequency of the innovation keyword is not a traditional innovation metric since it does not account directly for the number of new products , processes and services but rather the frequency of online comments about their new features .
This new metric embeds the advantage of emphasising the ability of a firm to differentiate itself by articulating the innovative aspects of its products and services .
The introduction of such metric could help firms in addressing the old paradigm of an increasing product variety coexisting with a decreasing customer satisfaction ( Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) .
This section presents respectively a supervised approach to fit and evaluate the relation between our innovation metrics and value co-creation ( Section 3.1 ) and an unsupervised approach to cluster co-creative firms in terms of their involvement in co-creation values ( Section 3.2 ) .
We extend the previous work by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) by applying a Neural Network model to assess the relationship between the innovation and co-creation variables and a self organizing map to classify the firms of our case study .
A Neural Network approach to model innovation based outcomes Artificial Neural Networks ( ANN ) are computing methods ( algorithms ) whose behaviour mimics the human brain ( Hykin , 1999 ; Angelini , di Tollo , & Roli , 2008 ) .
ANNs are composed of basic elementary units ( neurons ) which , when taken as single units , are able to execute some simple basic operations , but when connected to create a network , they can perform complicated tasks and solve complex problems , especially when the particular problem model is unknown in advance and when the relationships amongst the different components are non-linear .
The most common ANN model is the multi-layer Neural Network , often called feed-forward Neural Network , which allows a generalisation of the model becoming a general function approximator .
The feed-forward Neural Network introduced some layers between the input variables X and the observed response Y .
These layers are called hidden layers and each of that can assume different number of neurons and different activation functions .
Each neuron is connected to each neuron belonging to an adjacent layer , while there are no connections between neurons of the same layer .
The connections are called weights and represent the parameters of the Neural Network .
These parameters can change their values in a learning procedure and this adaptation of weights allow the model to better fit with the observed output .
We refer to Bishop ( 1996 ) for a wider explanation of the Neural Network models and to Rumelhart , Hinton , and Williams ( 1986 ) for the description of the most applied optimisation algorithm , the Back-Error Propagation , for estimating the weights .
The one hidden layer architecture is wildly used because it can approximate any function with a finite number of discontinuities , arbitrarily well , given sufficient neurons in the hidden layer ( Hagan , Demuth , & Beale , 1996 ) .
The main advantage of ANN approaches consists in their generalisation capabilities , i.e .
in their ability to operate over data that have never been seen before , and for this reason they are used in tasks such as pattern recognition , forecasting , optimisation and classification ( Angelini et al. , 2008 ; Zemella , De March , Borrotti , & Poli , 2011 ) .
In addition , the application of the ANN approach has another significant advantage in not relying on any specific preliminary model .
Furthermore , they are robust with respect to noisy and missing data , which do not hinder the network operations ( but of course trigger some degree of tolerable performance degradation ) .
All those requirements make their use appropriate for the problem at hand , in which a model is still far from being developed .
In this research we consider the three value co-creation components , defined in Section 2.2 , as the input variables and the perception of innovation , defined in Section 2.3 , as the output variable .
To test for the existence of a relationship between the input and the output variables , we have performed experiments with a feed-forward network .
Network parameters have been tuned by means of F-Race ( Birattari , Stützle , Paquete , & Varrentrapp , 2002 ) .
A network composed of 3 input neurons , 5 hidden neurons and 1 output neuron turned out to be the best possible option for our study .
We started by training the network using for the training set , 180 randomly chosen firms out of the collected data , and evaluating the generalisation accuracy of the model on the test set which is formed by the remaining part of the data ( 93 firms ) .
Moreover , the Neural Network was trained by means of BackPropagation Momentum ( with parameters η = 0.2 and β = 0.5 ) .
In order to avoid over-fitting , we have performed this procedure over 30 different partitions of data to test the degree of the generalisation of the results .
The goal of this experimental phase was to see whether the network is able to correctly generalise the innovation-related output variable over not-seen-before data .
Results for this approach will be shown on Section 4.1 .
Self Organising Map to cluster firms ’ involment in co-creation values Data mining tools are very helpful in analysing data , in supporting decision and in extracting knowledge from data , but some unaffordable problems can arise when system responses are not collected .
These problems are tackled by unsupervised learning methods , that are able to extract key relations among input data without any support of collected outputs of the system .
Many efforts have been concentrated to develop unsupervised cluster algorithms and data reduction algorithms to make relations among inputs more comprehensible such as k-means clustering ( MacQueen , 1967 ) , PCA ( Jolliffe , 1986 ) or multidimensional scaling ( Borg & Groenen , 2005 ) .
In our approach we focus on using Kohonen Self-Organising Map ( SOM ) algorithm ( Kohonen , Schroeder , & Huang , 2001 ) .
A SOM is a type of artificial Neural Network that is trained using unsupervised learning to produce a two-dimensional , discretised representation of the input space of the training samples , called map .
We selected SOM method for its appreciable features that allow to recognise groups of similar input vectors ( clustering ) even when non-linear relations among variables exist .
Let an initial lattice , the Self-Organising Map , be defined by vi = { v1 , … , v4 } neurons as an a priori choice , and let be each neuron associated to a prototype vector mi , formed by a vector of weights with j = { 1 , … , p } where p = 4 is the number of variables of the data set matrix ( i.e .
the three value co-creation components , defined in Section 2.2 and the perception of innovation , defined in Section 2.3 ) .
Initially the set of weights is randomly selected in .
The SOM is iteratively trained , at each iteration t a sample vector x is randomly chosen from the input data set , euclidean distances between x and all the mi are then calculated .
The neuron vi whose prototype has the closest distance from x ( 1 ) identifies the winning neuron at iteration t and it is called Best Matching Unit ( BMU ) .
The weights of the prototype associated to the BMU and to its closest neighbours in the SOM lattice are adjusted towards the x vector .
This adjustment decreases with time and with distance from the BMU according to : ( 2 ) where α ( t ) is a monotonically decreasing learning coefficient .
The ψ ( x , t ) function is a gaussian kernel function over the neighbours of the BMU so that also the neighbouring neurons are moved closer to the input vector , but with smaller magnitude , at each learning step .
The training procedure is then iterated for all the inputs of the data set and during the training , data lying near each other in the input space are mapped onto nearby map units ( Vesanto & Alhoniemi , 2000 ) .
The result of the procedure is that the winning neuron is more likely to be a BMU whenever a similar vector is presented .
As more and more inputs are presented , each neuron in the layer closest to a group of input vectors soon adjusts its weight vectors toward those input vectors .
In this section we are going to show the results obtained by experimental analysis .
Section 4.1 will show the results obtained using ANN to determine the correlation between co-creation and innovation ; Section 4.2 will show the results obtaining using SOM to cluster firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in co-creation .
Neural Networks to determine the correlation between co-creation and innovation The results obtained by ANN clearly indicate that there is a relationship between the actual and desired outputs , and this assertion is of the utmost importance , since it is observed over the test set .
It suggests that , since the network has been trained using the co-creation component values , the variation of the co-creation components is able to explain firms ’ perception of innovation .
This could be seen on Fig 1 , where the expected output ( innovation ) for the test examples is shown along the x-axis , and the actual network output ( innovation ) for the same dataset is shown along the y-axis .
Just results obtained by tackling two different partitions of data are reported .
Other partitionings lead to comparable behaviours .
Relationship between desired and actual output for two different train-test… Fig 1 .
Relationship between desired and actual output for two different train-test partitions .
The x-axis corresponds to the expected output value ( perception ) ; the y-axis corresponds to the actual network value .
In order to verify if there is a generalised trend of correlation between the current network output and the desired output ( innovation metric ) found over the 30 different training-test partition , we plot , in Fig 2 , the cumulative empirical distribution of Spearman ’ s rank based correlation ( Spearman , 1904 ) value between desired and current network ’ s output values .
We decided to introduce a correlation analysis instead of defining an error measure due to the lack of such an error measure in previous research .
In order to assess an error measure , we should have introduced a subjective threshold , without no guarantee on the soundness of this threshold .
A correlation analysis instead , just relies on data , without further manipulation and without taking into account the variable scale .
Furthermore we decided to use the rank-based correlation rather than , i.e. , Pearson correlation , in order to evidence non-linear features between variables .
It is nonetheless worthwhile to notice that rank based correlation and Pearson indicator lead to comparable results .
Cumulative distribution of the Spearman ’ s rank based correlation values between… Fig 2 .
Cumulative distribution of the Spearman ’ s rank based correlation values between desired output ( perception ) and actual output over 30 train-test partitions .
We can see that there exists a positive rank-based correlation on the variables under examination , and even in the cases where this relationship appears to be weaker , it is never smaller than 0.5 .
The correlation measure is greater than 0.85 in 70 % of the cases , i.e .
the positive relationship between variables appears to be robust .
Hence , we can conclude that Neural Networks can be used to examine the relationship between the co-creation component and firms perception of innovation ( see Section 4.1 ) .
This result is in agreement with the results from the linear regression analysis provided by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) , which shows that there is a statistically significant positive association between the perception of innovation and the value co-creation components “ Customer relationships enabled through partnerships and cooperation ” and “ Mutual learning mechanisms ” .
The agreement and the high explanatory power of the linear regression model ( 49.0 % , assessed by the adjusted R square value ) suggest that linear models are quite adequate in describing the relationship between value co-creation and the perception of innovation , also showing with the additional advantages of being less time consuming as well as being able to identify the dominant role of specific co-creation components .
The combination of the results from the ANN and linear regression analysis provides evidence in support of one of the initial hypotheses that more co-creative firms are in a better position to differentiate themselves by emphasising the innovative aspects of their new products , processes and services .
The good agreement between the ANN and linear regression does not address the question of how good the online innovation metric is in describing the innovative capacity of firms .
The answer to this question requires the additional research focusing on the relationship between the three value co-creation components and some traditional innovation metrics based on the number of new products , processes and services .
Results of SOM classification The present section provides the results of the SOM approach for the classification of the firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in co-creation .
The results provided by the SOM to the classification of firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in co-creation are compared to previous results ( Tanev et al. , 2011 ) generated by K-means cluster analysis .
Both classification methods suggest that the firms can be classified in four groups .
Table 4 shows the contingency table including the number of firms in each of the four groups ( clusters ) generated by the two different methods .
The table has to be read as follows : cell ( row , col ) represents the intersection ( in term of firms ) between the cluster row ( produced by k-means ) and the cluster col ( produced by SOM ) .
Table 4 .
Common elements ( firms ) differences amongst clusters found by cluster analysis by Tanev et al .
( 2011 ) and SOM .
CAi indicates the ith cluster obtained by cluster analysis ; SOMj represent the jth clusters obtained by SOM ( i , j ∈ { 1234 } ) .
SOM1 SOM2 SOM3 SOM4 CA1 47 0 0 55 CA2 7 0 6 0 CA3 0 0 21 0 CA4 0 105 0 32 It can be clearly seen that cluster 3 generated by the k-means method is entirely contained within one of the groups generated by the SOM method .
The analysis shows that these are exactly the firms that are most active in co-creation .
The second group of firms generated by the SOM method is entirely contained in fourth group of firms generated by the K-means method .
It could be pointed out that the good agreement between the two lists of firms most active in co-creation is remarkable .
It shows that the SOM method is able to quantitatively identify such firms opening the opportunity for the potential application of additional qualitative comparative analysis to examine their specific co-creation strategies .
The present study provides an ANN analysis to examine the relationship between the degree of value co-creation activities and firms ’ innovativeness .
Although , it is impossible to claim the existence of a causal relationship , the results suggest that value co-creation practices could be considered good indicators of the firms innovation-related outcomes such as the degree of online articulation of the innovative aspects of their new products , processes and services .
The advantage of such approach can be found in the opportunity to test the existence of this relationship without any preliminary assumption about its specific functional form .
This opportunity appears to be highly relevant given the early stage of quantitative value co-creation research and the still limited knowledge about the relationship between co-creation and innovation .
In addition , the present work applies SOMs to classify the firms in terms of the degree of their involvement in value co-creation .
Therefore , our main contributions of this work should be seen in the specific methodological setting , since it could open the way for applications of ANN modelling to co-creative innovation research .
We stress out that , up to the authors knowledge , this is the first application of these different Neural Networks models to innovation and co-creation .
These two approaches have shown a high degree of flexibility and performance in adaptation , prediction and classification .
We could however suggest as a subject of future research the development and the comparison of different Neural Networks in terms of topologies and connections in order to generate reliable and robust models to predict more complex innovation activities .
One should also compare the SOM approach with other unsupervised appraoches to determine , whether or not , a Neural Network model platform could be suited to simultaneously model and classify such kind of data sets .
The potential value of a combined application of both modelling , ANN and SOM , could be found in their ability to take into account the inherent complexity and the emerging nature of value co-creation networks .
We stress out the fact that the results shown here were based on an online innovation metric that has been recently introduced in the literature .
Such an approach will provide an opportunity for future research to focus on the development of specific online innovation metrics to overcome the limits of more traditional ones , such as the ones suggested in the OSLO manual .
This could open new research areas focusing on the development of business intelligence and innovation research tools that would increase the utility of both managers and researchers .